# Video Essays

## Video 1

*Chants of Sennaar* was one of my favorite games of 2023, which is really saying something. Starting as a hobby project from two French artists, Julien Moya and Thomas Panuel, *Chants of Sennaar* is all about deciphering foreign languages and cultures. Filled with varied and satisfying gameplay, it's an engaging ride all the way through—engaging enough to make a certain green, freaky bird jealous. It'll leave you feeling like a linguistic genius, capable of learning any language just off of pure intuition and logic. A feeling so intoxicating, it might compel you to buy a ticket to Paris just to be thoroughly disappointed. And not because it took you a whole trip into a foreign place to humble yourself, nor because of the condition of the actual city, but because it turns out that everyone there already speaks English.

Seriously speaking, English is a privilege we take for granted. We're free to learn whatever extra language, while the rest of the world is burdened to learn this god-awful language. Oh, I could go off on how useless the words "bi-weekly" and "bi-monthly" are. And if we all speak the same language, like English, God might confuse us, like in the tale that inspires the game: the Tower of Babel. Unified by one language, mankind once built a massive tower on the lands of Shinar with ambitions high enough to breach the heavens. Nothing felt impossible for man, and so God confused the people and their language, causing them to abandon the tower and spread across the world. Post-flood, the lore for the game goes a little differently, and it's all ironically shown rather than told.

The game really resonated with me since I already enjoy deciphering and guessing other languages, especially when I'm able to leverage that knowledge back into English. I even found a more meta way of playing the game by switching languages in the options or *options*. Although it's not a great way of learning a language, it's more helpful for reinforcing a language, like the Spanish you took in high school. And occasionally, there are some very specific words that I don't even use in English. Unlike real words and languages, there's an intuition in learning the symbols of the game. All of the verbs have a line underneath them, all of the people include a symbol for man, and all of the places are enclosed by a box. Of course, you also have to learn the grammar as well. For example, this is a symbol for man, and to indicate plurality, you need to add a duplicate to make the word "men." Pretty different from English, where you just add an "s" or an "es" if it already ends with "s." But then that doesn't apply to the example I just used, where instead of "mans," it's "men." You see how hard English is?

Luckily, it won't be as hard to learn the language of the Devotees as... hold on, who are these guys? Oh, they speak a different language. Yes, in *Chants of Sennaar*, you learn not only one fictional language but multiple, each with their own words, rules, groups, and cultures. And much like its gorgeous aesthetics, it's all minimalistic, which is fine for the scope of the game. All of these elements are in service of contextualizing the puzzles. Some hints are found through observing the culture of each group. Comparing the words of the Devotees to the Warriors, both have their own vocabularies that reflect their cultures. The Devotees are religious and have words like "God," "preacher," and "Church." The Warriors don't have such words and instead have more militant ones like "duty," "weapon," and "fortress." With such a fundamental and conceptual disconnect, it's a fertile breeding ground for miscommunication. To overcome this disconnect, you'll have to approximate the words that the cultures lack. For example, almost all the cultures lack the word for "we," so you have to instead pluralize the word for "I."

This reminds me of real words that are unique to cultures or words that do not have a direct translation. I might have misremembered this, but I had a Swedish friend once tell me the word *mola*, which means to stuff one's face with snow. He wanted to show off how this specific action had its own word, with possibly 94 other variations. It might reflect the, uh, playful nature of Swedish culture. Meanwhile, other cultures might not have a word for snow. For Korean culture, a unique word I know is *eolkeunhada* (얼큰하다), which is a very beautiful word that reflects how beautiful Korean culture is. It would make for a great tattoo. It's used to describe something that is healing and, uh, spicy. It's very niche and mostly applies to drinking spicy soup and clearing the sinus. So when you drink some good *seonjiguk* after a night of *soju*, you'll say, "*eolkeunhada*."

But real languages are complex enough to where it doesn't prevent you from understanding these words and concepts. The language barrier might actually be lesser than the cultural barrier. Like Koreans using the English word "fighting." You got this! Fighting, girl, fighting! You know what "fighting" means, but why? Well, "fighting" or *paiting* (파이팅) resembles the word "fighting," which means "you can do it." It's a word of encouragement, usually in the context of spectating a sport or wishing someone good luck on a test. It's similar to saying "Let's go!" in English or "Forza!" in Italian. Actually, the Japanese also use the word *faito* (ファイト) in a similar fashion. The same words or concepts can have different connotations based on context and culture, and the game reflects that. According to the Warriors, the hedonistic Bards are called the "chosen ones," whereas the Devotees are called... oh. And it doesn't help when you have to use that word to describe an actual monster. It's not much better than how the Bards see the Warriors that admire them, which is also the word for what they essentially call their slaves. Such a limited vocabulary would shape what you believe in and how you behave, which is exactly what the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis suggests: that language affects the way you think. Though that term is a misnomer, and the subject itself has been highly contentious. But there has been some recent empirical evidence that suggests the effect might exist in a weaker degree, as linguistic relativity instead.

A quick test: can you tell me which cardinal direction are you facing right now? You know, are you facing east, south, southwest? Without a compass, do you know which direction is north? Well, the Kuuk Thaayorre people of Australia do, instantly, because of their language and culture. They're always conscious of where they are relative to the cardinal directions. In fact, that is how they greet each other. They start off conversations by stating which direction they're heading. And it's not just a neat party trick; they're better navigators because of this. Although, is this because of their language or more so their culture? English has words for cardinal directions. We understand the concept; we just don't have a culture that emphasizes them in this way. Uh, for the scope of this video, let's just say it's both.

Regardless of how much language influences us, it didn't help overcome the cultural gap amongst the groups of the tower. The Anchorites, with their technical progress, first built the Tower and opened it up to all the other groups. But as the tower grew in popularity, so did miscommunication and misunderstanding. Attempts were made to cross the language barrier, but it was not enough to cross the cultural barrier. Eventually, each group found their reasons to section themselves off. The Warriors became insular, blocking off the Devotees over prejudice. The Bards became indolent, uninterested in any culture but their own. The Alchemists became zealous, doing anything for the sake of progress. And finally, the Anchorites became exiled, trapped by their advanced technology. The tower became a partition of segregated cultures until the protagonist was created to step in as this multilingual and multicultural Messiah, learning the words and the ways of all the people and showing how each of them can provide what the others lack, whether it be strength, music, science, freedom, or kinship.

While ascending the tower, we observe how each culture is more technologically advanced than the previous, culminating into this dystopian, lifeless world. Technological superiority can't fix everything, not even death. It'll come to a point where it anchors people, leaving them as isolated husks unable to communicate with others, even of the same language. Yes, of course, we need science and technology; otherwise, we wouldn't believe that germs exist and lack ways to cure diseases. But we also need faith, something to believe in. Otherwise, we break down and become useless nihilists that believe that nothing matters. We can place our faith in each other and trust that they can provide what we lack. A machine can translate words, but it can't translate culture, at least not yet. We still need people to learn and explain other cultures, and this can't be done by having everyone learn the same language. So much would be lost in the process. If language and culture can affect the way we think, then we can gain different modes of thought by learning multiple. Just another perspective is all that is needed to reveal what's necessary. While different views can cause strife, they can also solve problems. This is reflected by the very end of the game, where it shows that the symbol that each culture holds paramount is actually the same thing under different perspectives, literally. I guess this moment of clarity was so potent it un-Babeled all the people in the end. Anyways, it revealed that the one thing that unites all cultures is a purpose, something to place our faith and science in, all achieved through language and culture.

If all of that is too lofty, then this is the key takeaway: play *Chants of Sennaar* and learn another language.

Before you go, I just want to say thank you. You know, really, like, thank you for watching this video all the way through. It's already a miracle enough for you to, well, I guess be on YouTube in the first place. And then it's another miracle for this video to show up on your feed, and then for you to watch it, and then watch it all the way through. So, like, you know, I just really want to take the time to just thank you for all of that. You know, I hope you found this video entertaining and find it interesting enough to, you know, think about. And, um, I also really want to thank those that subscribe to me as well, that you liked my videos and you find my stuff interesting enough to do that. So really, thank you guys so much for that. And I'll be sure to make more videos. Um, you might be surprised by what the next video is. It is related to language, but you know, it's not related to video games. So I guess look out for that. You don't even got to watch that video, you know. I already thank you enough for just watching this one. So thank you.

### Comments

#### Top Comment by A Fomcat (edited)

It's a really interesting puzzle adventure game that captures the power of deciphering foreign languages and cultures, turning the art of translation into an interactive form of gameplay. The way it explores the relationships between communication and understanding language as gameplay is really exciting to witness. With multiple cultures, it highlights both the differences and similarities between human expressions. It features linguistic gameplay that is diverse and satisfying, but it's not always easy to solve. The overall message about overcoming cultural gaps, miscommunication, and understanding is simple but profoundly important, especially in today's world.

As someone who is also learning a foreign language, it was fascinating to see how the game chooses to represent the difficulties and joys of learning foreign words through context (input hypotheses). As a translation, it's not entirely accurate since it works similarly for me in reality, but it's interesting to see how the game felt like you comprehended the language in the game through symbols and emotions, compared to human languages and the complexities of a language like English. However, the game doesn't have to be as complex as a real-life game to learn languages (the game would probably not be fun then). It's more about to stimulate a fascination and a certain model of language acquisition.

The few points of criticism would be, the puzzles may become repetitive or monotonous after a while, and a bit of hand-holding would be needed when it comes to the structure of the language. The stealth segment seemed out of place or unnecessary to the game. The panoramas are beautiful and impressive, I don't know, something to be impressive, a little bland.

But if you are interested in language-based games, I would recommend other games like *Tunic* and *Outer Wilds*, or to read about the origin of *Return of the Obra Dinn* and *The Case of the Golden Idol*, you should give *Chants of Sennaar* a try.
-Thanks for your insight and perspective on the game.

Watching your videos since your *Sifu* review, your introduction of the medium are really remarkably good. Even though you don't have many subscribers (and I am someone who doesn't normally comment but I wanted to write something) keep it up as long as you enjoy it.
Cheers
P.S. You probably would say '얼큰해요' (eolkeunhaeyo) or '얼큰하게 해요' (eolkeunhage haeyo) :)

#### Comment by u/Ari_Rahikkala

Very late response, but this thread came up first as I searched for the games, and I figure other players might still land here looking for comparisons. It's been a bit over a year since I played *Heaven's Vault*, so I'm partially going off memory here.

Some spoilers, but these games can handle being mildly spoiled IMO.

*Chants* is much more fun to play moment to moment. *Vault* just feels very clumsy in its basic gameplay. There's so much slow, frustrating trundling around, looking for so many easily missable items.

But that clumsiness is in service of *Vault's* biggest strength: Its ambiguity. That game really, really loves its ambiguity. You can perfectly well miss important facts, people will keep secrets from you and it's very hard to know what their reactions to your words and actions mean, you can miss entire areas of the game and significant NPCs, you can come to the end of the game and have very little idea what's going on, and the game is perfectly happy to just leave you in the dark: Maybe play a NG+ if you feel like you need to know more. I don't know if any of that is fun, but it's an idea that the game can proudly stand on.

Both have their own great strengths as a language game. *Vault* digs into one language, with bizarre compound symbols and a constantly rising complexity curve as you unearth more fragments. *Chants* has multiple languages with different grammars, and you have to actually produce and not just decipher sentences in the languages.

Especially in the later levels, *Chants* is very good at making you feel smart, by initially having the new language seem completely overwhelming to learn at all, but then letting you figure it out bit by bit, until you come back to some area where earlier everything was gobbledygook but now you realize you've worked it all out. With *Vault*, the reward for figuring out simpler language is that you just get more and more complex language thrown at you.

I guess it's appropriate with *Vault's* ambiguity that... I really don't know how much they were trying to make a fun game and failed, and how much they were trying to make a very unique (but not that fun) experience of uncertainty and achieved exactly what they wanted. But with *Chants*, you could tell they wanted to make a fun game about a language, and absolutely succeeded.

(Actually, one thing *Heaven's Vault* reeeeeally succeeds at is communicating that state of knowledge, that there are known unknowns: That is, you can play it, and come away from it being pretty confident that things could have gone a different way, but you can't point to specific decisions where events went one way where another decision would have gone differently.

There's plenty of games that just have missable stuff and you simply don't know at all, and then you only find out about it online and complain at the developer because they didn't give you any hints. *Heaven's Vault* is the only game I've played where I came out of it knowing for sure that I missed stuff, maybe very significant stuff, and being perfectly happy about it and having enjoyed my time with the game, despite having no idea what I missed.)

#### Comment by u/SvenHudson

I've only played a bit of the demo of *Chants* but I can pretty strongly say *Heaven's Vault* is more what you're looking for. *Heaven's Vault* is a story about trying to piece together history that spends most of its time having you read present-day dialogue about the game's setting and story themes, so when you do solve the language puzzles it has a greater sense that you're unraveling significant mysteries that are bigger than your own curiosity as a player. Also I think its fictional writing system just has a more compelling design to learn the ins and outs of.

That said, of the two, *Chants* has you type your own words for the translations and *Heaven's Vault* gives you multiple choice problems so *Chants* is definitely the more "from scratch" of the two.

#### Comment by u/valdi0

I've played both of them. But have only finished *Sennaar*. In my opinion both are good. I would say *Heaven's Vault* is a bit harder. In *Chants of Sennaar* when you get enough information you are presented with a notebook with drawings which help define the symbol meaning.

In my experience I believe I like *Sennaar* more than *Heaven's*. I actually bought *Heaven's* first. But the pacing and navigation of the game broke the immersion of it really fast. The navigation in *Heaven's Vault* is terrible. You walk this Paper Mario character in the world with invisible walls and maybe more infuriating there are hidden items that you can't see, they only trigger when you are on top of them. So you will be walking a lot just to find them, which again is just a filler to make the game longer. And finally every now and then have to get to your ship and have to navigate the nebula. During this time it's just a filler to make the game longer and it's so boring. And controls are not the best.

On the other hand *Sennaar* navigation is limited you click the character moves. But you don't need any filler or navigation crap. You just explore and start making sense of the world. The art direction at least for me is way better in *Sennaar*.

In my opinion I would always go first *Sennaar* and once I finish the game if you like the experience and want more then get *Heaven's Vault*. If you start with *Heaven's Vault* you might have an experience like me where an hour of the game felt like a lot and it's not what I really wanted.

## Video 2

I've been wanting to make this video for a while now. Back in June, I was given a free download code for the game *Heaven's Vault*, and while this isn't a sponsored video, playing *Heaven's Vault* got me thinking about how games can turn the process of learning a language into a game mechanic. The idea of turning language learning into a game isn't that out there; Duolingo is a rather well-known example. However, Duolingo isn't quite what I'm talking about. If someone wants to use Duolingo, it's because there's a specific language they want to learn. The games I'll be talking about are all games first and foremost, and the languages you learn by playing them are all conlangs—constructed languages created for those games.

*Heaven's Vault* is a game developed by Inkle, released in April 2019. You play as the archaeologist Aliya Elasra, traveling between the moons of the Nebula along with her robot companion Six, searching through ruins to discover the true nature of the history of her civilization. All throughout the adventure, Aliya finds artifacts with text written on them in an ancient language that everyone in the game just calls "Ancient." As a conlang enthusiast, I would describe Ancient as an ideographic, oligosynthetic English relex—a sequence of words which will be complete nonsense to some of you. An English relex is a constructed language that's actually just English but with different words. Relaxes are kinda boring, but to be fair, there are some distinct advantages of using them over more fully developed conlangs in the context of a video game. Most importantly, translating from English into a relex is really easy, taking as much effort as a simple find and replace. This makes it so you can create a very large amount of text in a language without taking very much development time, which for an indie-developed adventure game like *Heaven's Vault*, makes sense.

An oligosynthetic language is one where all words are made out of a small amount of core vocabulary. Oligosynthesis does not occur naturally, but it's a somewhat popular idea in conlangs, especially for engineered languages. A language where the vocabulary is oligosynthetic and the grammar and syntax are copied from English is, in principle, a language that an English speaker would have a relatively easy time figuring out. And the final piece of the puzzle of how Ancient is designed: idiographic means that each symbol in the writing system represents a specific idea. Since it's both idiographic and oligosynthetic, there is a relatively small set of symbols—46 to be exact—each of which represents some simple idea, and all words are built from those ideas. So this phrase, which is the title of the game, *Heaven's Vault*, consists of 10 ideographic characters. Even though this is definitely the word for "heavens" followed by the word for "vault," the formation of the individual words breaks down in a more interesting way. Like, this part of the word "heavens" on its own is the word for "star." So if you encounter this word after you already know the word for "star," you could guess that this word probably has something to do with space or the sky.

The way this information is presented to the player in-game is that Aliya just sort of has an intuition for what stuff in Ancient could mean. Since Ancient is an English relex, you translate texts one word at a time, and for each word, Aliya has a few guesses for what it could mean and usually suggests some related words that probably mean similar things. One major thing preventing you from just guessing blindly from the choices Aliya gives you is that there's no immediate feedback for any translation. You have to wait until you've used the same word translated the same way in two or three texts before Aliya says she's now confident that the word has that specific meaning. I think that's the main defining thing for the way *Heaven's Vault* interprets language learning as a game mechanic: how all feedback you get as a player is from the character you're playing as. There ends up being this weird disconnect between what Aliya understands and what the player understands. However, that disconnect does eventually go away, or at least it stops being so noticeable. As I played *Heaven's Vault*, I started to become more familiar with the Ancient language, and I eventually developed the same intuition that Aliya has, able to look at an unfamiliar bit of Ancient text and come up with some guesses as to what it might mean. It was a lot of fun once I was at that point, and in the late game, the language learning mechanics feel like you're actually learning a language and learning the secrets of an ancient civilization. For what *Heaven's Vault* does, I feel like this mechanic works fine: being asked to translate things one word at a time and then later being told if individual words are right. I also like the mechanic where sometimes the text you want to translate is written without spaces, so you have to figure out where the word boundaries are. That's also pretty clever.

Okay, now let's talk about *Sethian*. *Sethian* is a game created by Grant Kuning, released in November 2016. It's a short game where you type in a computer terminal in the Sethianese language to figure out what happened to the Sethianese civilization. The interface looks extremely intimidating at first, with five whole pages of like a hundred characters to use. Much like Ancient in *Heaven's Vault*, Sethianese is written with an idiographic writing system, and while it isn't oligosynthetic, there is an abnormally large number of compound words. A key difference is that Sethianese is not just an English relex; even if its grammar is nothing to write home about, you can't just translate everything word for word. I mean, granted, there are some things you can just translate word for word, but not everything.

In a lot of ways, *Sethian* is a lot more explicitly hand-holding than *Heaven's Vault*. The game starts off super linear, with the player character writing down close to exact translations of everything the computer says and then just writing down exactly what they want to say to the computer next. But the way this works is, I think, pretty interesting. You're playing as a linguist who already knows a little about the Sethianese language, and they have access to the writings of linguists who described the language before them. As a player, you don't get to see those writings; you only get to look at this notebook. For most of the game, you're not really trying to figure out how the language works, but how to read your player character's notes. As the game goes on, however, unlike *Heaven's Vault*, the hand-holding starts to ease off. There are some words where you're provided no translation and only given a loose explanation of the language itself from the computer you're talking to. Even later, you start needing to figure out everything by yourself, with nothing to guide you other than a dictionary of individual words and the notes about previous translations.

I have mixed feelings about *Sethian*. The game definitely is much shorter than I would have liked. Most of the characters you can type on this keyboard don't actually mean anything; like, they're only here to provide the illusion of a fully developed language. There's also a lot of frustration that comes from trying to ask specific questions and just getting "I don't understand" and "I can't tell you what that means" over and over, even in cases where the question itself is grammatical in the Sethianese language. I guess it's somewhat realistic that this computer wouldn't be able to answer every single question you have, but the total set of questions it *can* answer is disappointingly small. Still, there is one thing that *Sethian* does that I admire a lot, and that's how it has the player learning a language by *using* it. Sure, you're using it under the very clear guidance of your notebook telling you exactly what to say for most of the game, but in terms of getting a player to feel like they can actually understand a language, asking them to translate *into* a language is a lot more engaging than asking them to translate *from* it. And the whole time I was playing, trying to get information out of this computer in a language I was slowly starting to understand, I was thinking of my favorite example of a game where there's a puzzle that has the player learning a conlang in order to progress.

Technically speaking, my favorite game that features translation as a game mechanic is *Rhythm Heaven Megamix* for the 3DS. It doesn't do a particularly good job interpreting translation as a game mechanic; it just happens to be a good game in general. Anyway, that's not what I'm going to be talking about. Telling you exactly what I'll be talking about is a little tricky because the fact that this game has a translation puzzle in it is a spoiler, since it happens close to the end of the game. So, like, I guess here's a general spoiler warning for just some game, and I can't tell you which one it is without spoiling it. Okay, I'll just say it: the third and final game I'll be discussing will be *Frog Fractions 2*. It is literally impossible to talk about *Frog Fractions 2* in any capacity without spoiling it because *Frog Fractions 2* is a game made entirely out of surprises, and the puzzle I want to talk about is close to the end of the game. Please take that into consideration before proceeding.

*Frog Fractions 2* is the third entry in the popular edutainment series *Frog Fractions*, created by Jim Stormdancer. The *Frog Fractions* series is known for its ability to subvert player expectations with deep gameplay and occasional story hiding under a mundane surface. The game, which is specifically *not* called *Frog Fractions 2*, branches out into far more diverse topics than the original's focus on fractions. The sequel features segments that teach about calculus, geometry, history, ethics, classic literature, and much more. *Frog Fractions 2* is largely a mini-game collection with a wide variety of educational vignettes contained within the text-based, ZZT-inspired overworld called Text World. Text World is full of little secrets beyond just the portals to mini-games. There are puzzles to solve, NPCs to talk to, and strange objects to collect. Since everything is made out of text, it's unclear what any of these collectibles are. There are 18 hidden throughout the world, with each item hidden in two spots. If you collect both instances of one item, you're awarded with a piece of trivia about the band Korn, in true *Frog Fractions* style. For most of the game, it just feels like these are arbitrary collectibles; you can't really do anything with them until you meet the Frog.

The Frog notices you. "House Infinity Delta," it says, gesturing at the rotten fruit behind it. The Frog is talking to you using the very symbols that you've been collecting as items throughout the whole game. And this is where the genius of *Frog Fractions 2* comes in. During this entire encounter with the Frog, you are at no point told directly what anything means. You must figure out this Frog's language entirely through context. You need to not only figure out what the Frog wants from you but also what *you* want from the Frog and how to tell it what you want. You want to collect that "almost equal to" symbol in the water there, but you can't get it unless you can tell that Frog to push over that red crate. And even if you can manage to do that, it can't push over the red crate because there's a locked door in the way, so it needs to get that key first.

You'd think that this puzzle would be impossible. And yeah, it's very hard. But the feedback you get from this Frog as you try to learn how to speak to it is so much more than anything that happens in *Heaven's Vault* or *Sethian*. And that's partially because of what's allowed by the restrictions at play here. The Frog language is yet another conlang with an idiographic writing system, and this one has the smallest lexicon by far. You don't even have access to all 18 words yet because one of them is your reward for solving this puzzle. On top of that, you can only say three words at a time to the Frog. But as a result of that restriction, everything you say—and I mean *absolutely everything* that you can say to this Frog—it has a reasonable response to. Granted, yes, sometimes that response is a generic "I don't know what you mean," but only when that response actually makes sense. The Frog feels real, like it's genuinely trying to help you out despite the language barrier. And the way you learn how to speak to it is so brilliant. Like, if you say "clubs" to this Frog, the Frog looks around startled, then looks annoyed. "Gamma clubs," it says. And this little interaction, if you're clever, gives you a lot of information about both the Frog language and the Frog itself. You've seen the club suit elsewhere in the game; it's the way Text World's text-based graphics represent a gorilla, one of the common enemy types. If you assume that this character that looks exactly like a gorilla means "gorilla"—an assumption that doesn't apply for all characters in the Frog language that resemble physical objects in the world—the Frog's reaction makes sense. Of course, it's afraid that you, just out of context saying "gorilla," is supposed to be alerting it to the presence of a gorilla. And it's annoyed when it looks around and sees that there isn't one. But then the way it responds is also a super important bit of information. When it says "gamma clubs," you know that "clubs" means gorilla, so in this context, you can make a guess for what "gamma" means. Later, you might see the Frog use "gamma" again in a different context, and you can test your hypothesis again and try to see if your translation works in both contexts. And on top of that, the fact that this Frog is worried about a gorilla is actually a setup to a later part of the same puzzle, which is also a subtler setup to an even later part of the same puzzle. And dang, it's all so good.

So, looking at these three translation puzzle games, what can be said about the ways their approaches differ? None of these translation puzzles involve deciphering particularly interesting languages. Ancient, Sethianese, and the Frog language alike are all pretty boring from a conlanging perspective. But of course, that's not the point, is it? All three games successfully delivered on getting me to feel like I was learning a language. That feeling when things click and you finally understand something that at first was completely opaque is ubiquitous in puzzle games, and there's something about when that thing is a language that makes it all the more impactful.

In *Heaven's Vault*, being able to understand Ancient means being able to read more inscriptions on artifacts. Each new word you understand—or barring that, each word Aliya declares that you now understand—gives you a bit more access to the lore and world-building of the Nebula. In *Sethian*, being able to understand Sethianese means being able to ask the right questions and being able to understand the answers. Just like in *Heaven's Vault*, it's understanding for the sake of understanding, but the experience, the journey of how you get there, is fundamentally different. *Sethian* is a conversation. Each piece of information you learn directly impacts what information you could access next—that is, once the game stops directly telling you what to say. In *Frog Fractions 2*, being able to understand the Frog language means being able to talk to the Frog. You do learn things about the Frog, but the understanding itself is not the goal. You want to understand the Frog's language because you want it to do something for you, and the Frog wants something from you in return. I called *Sethian* a conversation a few sentences ago, but the Frog language puzzle in *Frog Fractions 2* embodies that so much more, so much better. In *Frog Fractions 2*, learning the language is a means to an end, but along the way, you have to make a connection with this character. You need to empathize with them. It's one thing to learn how to understand what something says; it's another thing entirely to learn how to understand how someone feels. The former can be achieved with any type of puzzle; for the latter, you need language.
