Okay, I will continue converting the book "The Next Conversation" into the `the_next_conversation_v2.md` format, starting from where the provided `v2` file left off in Chapter 7.

I will first generate the complete Table of Contents based on the entire structure of the original book, and then append the rest of the book content, ensuring consistent formatting.

<!-- markdownlint-disable-file MD024 -->

# The Next Conversation

*argue less, talk more*

Jefferson Fisher

## Table of Contents

- [The Next Conversation](#the-next-conversation)
  - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [Dedication](#dedication)
  - [Epigraph](#epigraph)
  - [Prologue](#prologue)
  - [Introduction](#introduction)
    - [Why I Wrote This Book](#why-i-wrote-this-book)
    - [How This Book Will Help You](#how-this-book-will-help-you)
    - [How to Apply This Book](#how-to-apply-this-book)
  - [Part I: The Essentials](#part-i-the-essentials)
    - [Chapter 1: Never Win an Argument](#chapter-1-never-win-an-argument)
      - [The Person You See](#the-person-you-see)
      - [The Struggle You Hear](#the-struggle-you-hear)
      - [The Challenge to Accept](#the-challenge-to-accept)
      - [CHAPTER SUMMARY](#chapter-summary)
    - [Chapter 2: Your Next Conversation](#chapter-2-your-next-conversation)
      - [The Power of Your Next Conversation](#the-power-of-your-next-conversation)
      - [Why Your Conversations Need Goals](#why-your-conversations-need-goals)
      - [Why Your Conversations Need Values](#why-your-conversations-need-values)
      - [CHAPTER SUMMARY](#chapter-summary-1)
    - [Chapter 3: The Truth About Connection](#chapter-3-the-truth-about-connection)
      - [What Is Connection?](#what-is-connection)
      - [Three Ways You Cut Off Connection](#three-ways-you-cut-off-connection)
        - [Cut 1: Lack of awareness](#cut-1-lack-of-awareness)
        - [Cut 2: Lack of understanding](#cut-2-lack-of-understanding)
        - [Cut 3: Lack of self-assurance](#cut-3-lack-of-self-assurance)
      - [A Quick Note on Confidence](#a-quick-note-on-confidence)
      - [CHAPTER SUMMARY](#chapter-summary-2)
  - [Part II: The Application](#part-ii-the-application)
  - [Rule 1: Say It with Control](#rule-1-say-it-with-control)
    - [Chapter 4: Control Yourself](#chapter-4-control-yourself)
      - [The Two Phases of Every Argument](#the-two-phases-of-every-argument)
      - [How Your Body Controls Your Response](#how-your-body-controls-your-response)
      - [Meet Your Triggers](#meet-your-triggers)
        - [1. Physical triggers {#physical-triggers}](#1-physical-triggers-physical-triggers)
        - [2. Psychological triggers {#psychological-triggers}](#2-psychological-triggers-psychological-triggers)
          - [Social evaluation triggers](#social-evaluation-triggers)
          - [Personal identity threats](#personal-identity-threats)
          - [Loss triggers](#loss-triggers)
      - [CHAPTER SUMMARY](#chapter-summary-3)
    - [Chapter 5: Control the Moment](#chapter-5-control-the-moment)
      - [Your First Word Is Your Breath](#your-first-word-is-your-breath)
      - [How to Take a Conversational Breath](#how-to-take-a-conversational-breath)
        - [1. To slow down your breathing, breathe through your nose {#to-slow-down-your-breathing-breathe-through-your-nose}](#1-to-slow-down-your-breathing-breathe-through-your-nose-to-slow-down-your-breathing-breathe-through-your-nose)
        - [2. To maintain calm, exhale longer {#to-maintain-calm-exhale-longer}](#2-to-maintain-calm-exhale-longer-to-maintain-calm-exhale-longer)
        - [3. To clear your mind, breathe rhythmically {#to-clear-your-mind-breathe-rhythmically}](#3-to-clear-your-mind-breathe-rhythmically-to-clear-your-mind-breathe-rhythmically)
      - [Your First Thought Is a Quick Scan](#your-first-thought-is-a-quick-scan)
      - [How to do a quick scan](#how-to-do-a-quick-scan)
      - [Your First Conversation Is a Small Talk](#your-first-conversation-is-a-small-talk)
      - [How to build your own small talk](#how-to-build-your-own-small-talk)
        - [Tie your small talk to your goals](#tie-your-small-talk-to-your-goals)
        - [Start with verbs](#start-with-verbs)
        - [Make it short and personal](#make-it-short-and-personal)
      - [CHAPTER SUMMARY](#chapter-summary-4)
    - [Chapter 6: Control the Pace](#chapter-6-control-the-pace)
      - [The Gift of a Pause](#the-gift-of-a-pause)
      - [How and When to Use Pauses](#how-and-when-to-use-pauses)
        - [Short pauses are reading glasses](#short-pauses-are-reading-glasses)
        - [Long pauses are mirrors](#long-pauses-are-mirrors)
      - [CHAPTER SUMMARY](#chapter-summary-5)
  - [Rule 2: Say It with Confidence](#rule-2-say-it-with-confidence)
    - [Chapter 7: Assertive Voice](#chapter-7-assertive-voice)
      - [Confidence Is a Feeling](#confidence-is-a-feeling)
      - [10 Ways to Practice Assertiveness Now {#ways-to-practice-assertiveness-now}](#10-ways-to-practice-assertiveness-now-ways-to-practice-assertiveness-now)
        - [Lesson 1: Every word matters](#lesson-1-every-word-matters)
        - [Lesson 2: Prove it to yourself](#lesson-2-prove-it-to-yourself)
        - [Lesson 3: Express your needs unapologetically](#lesson-3-express-your-needs-unapologetically)
        - [Lesson 4: Speak when it matters](#lesson-4-speak-when-it-matters)
        - [Lesson 5: Say less](#lesson-5-say-less)
        - [Lesson 6: Remove filler words](#lesson-6-remove-filler-words)
        - [Lesson 7: Never undersell](#lesson-7-never-undersell)
      - [CHAPTER SUMMARY](#chapter-summary-6)
      - [Side Note](#side-note)
    - [Chapter 8: Difficult People](#chapter-8-difficult-people)
      - [When Push Comes to Shove](#when-push-comes-to-shove)
      - [How to Deflect Insults, Belittling, and Rudeness](#how-to-deflect-insults-belittling-and-rudeness)
        - [When they insult or offend you](#when-they-insult-or-offend-you)
        - [When they belittle, patronize, or condescend to you](#when-they-belittle-patronize-or-condescend-to-you)
        - [When they're rude or dismissive](#when-theyre-rude-or-dismissive)
      - [Pushing Back Against Bad Apologies](#pushing-back-against-bad-apologies)
        - [The no-empathy apology](#the-no-empathy-apology)
        - [The no-apology apology](#the-no-apology-apology)
        - [The excuse apology](#the-excuse-apology)
        - [The toxic apology](#the-toxic-apology)
        - [The justification apology](#the-justification-apology)
      - [The End of Interruptions](#the-end-of-interruptions)
        - [Step 1: Let the other person interrupt you](#step-1-let-the-other-person-interrupt-you)
        - [Step 2: Use their name](#step-2-use-their-name)
        - [Step 3: Correct the behavior](#step-3-correct-the-behavior)
      - [A Better Way to Disagree](#a-better-way-to-disagree)
        - [Apply the Is it worth it? filter](#apply-the-is-it-worth-it-filter)
        - [Use your vantage point](#use-your-vantage-point)
      - [CHAPTER SUMMARY](#chapter-summary-7)
    - [Chapter 9: Boundaries](#chapter-9-boundaries)
      - [How to Build a Boundary](#how-to-build-a-boundary)
        - [Defining the perimeter](#defining-the-perimeter)
        - [Knowing your manual](#knowing-your-manual)
        - [Enforcing the boundary](#enforcing-the-boundary)
      - [How Setting Boundaries Changes Your Relationships](#how-setting-boundaries-changes-your-relationships)
      - [CHAPTER SUMMARY](#chapter-summary-8)
  - [Rule 3: Say It to Connect](#rule-3-say-it-to-connect)
    - [Chapter 10: Frames](#chapter-10-frames)
      - [What Is a Conversational Frame?](#what-is-a-conversational-frame)

## Dedication

For Sierra, who supports me
Jett and Ruby, who inspire me
My siblings, who inspired me first
My parents, who prayed over me
And all who tried that and followed me

## Epigraph

There ain't no good guy. There ain't no bad guy. There's only you and me
and we just disagree.
---Dave Mason, "We Just Disagree"

## Prologue

The worn-out Berber carpet of the old ranch house felt scratchy on my
legs. Wearing an oversize shirt and my Spider-Man underwear, I curled up
into a ball in the corner of the main room. My hair and skin were still
wet from my rushed, unheated shower. I was shivering. I was also
grinning ear-to-ear. Eight-year-old me wasn't going to miss a thing.
Everyone was in the main room. The patriarch of the family was my
great-grandfather, who was a federal judge. My grandfather, father,
first cousins, great uncles---you name it---were all trial lawyers.
Every year, the Fisher men would get together for an opening-weekend
hunt in the Hill Country of West Texas. There were thirteen joining in
total, and for the first time, I made it fourteen. I felt like I had
been called up to the big leagues. Me ---finally old enough to go on an
eight-hour drive with my dad listening to James Taylor, Jim Croce, and
Jerry Jeff Walker. Me---finally old enough to be around the big boys. I
hardly spoke a word, mind you, but it didn't matter. I drank IBC Root
Beer and ate more beef jerky than my momma would ever have allowed. The
first night was an experience cemented into my memory. As dinner
finished, my grandfather put his plate down and scooted to the edge of
his couch seat. He began to tell a story. Something about his job, a
judge, and a courthouse. I immediately recognized it as the same story
he had told my dad earlier that day while we were fixing an old deer
blind. Earlier, though, the story was more matter-of-fact. His voice
came out plain as he told it while searching for green paint in his
truck bed. But this was special. It was the same words, but it was a
very different story. I was entranced, watching as he stood up to
reenact a scene. He used his hands and face to give texture to his
voice. His volume went up on the exciting parts, low and slow on the
intense parts. Even his tone changed. Could this be the same story? He
captivated the room for nearly ten minutes. After a long pause, he
delivered the punch line, and the room filled with laughter. I felt as
though I had seen a magic show. The end of his story opened the floor to
others as one by one my cousins, dad, and even my great-grandfather took
turns with courtroom stories of their own. As trial lawyers, they were
all wonderful storytellers. The laughter went on for hours into the
night. I sat there in that corner transfixed by every story, every word,
with my knees tucked into my sleep shirt. I took it all in until I fell
asleep. It was late. My dad carried me off to bed, beef jerky still in
my hand. The whole evening for me had been the discovery of something
new yet strangely familiar, as if I had seen it all before. I remember
it immediately felt right to me, like a shoe that fit the first time you
tried it on. That night, and for the next ten years of opening weekends,
I received my family's inheritance: a passed-on identity dedicated to
advocacy through storytelling. I realized with each year gone by that
law was only the family profession---communication was the true family
passion.

To no one's surprise, I wanted to go to law school and become a trial
lawyer. And after practicing for ten years, I still don't know of
another profession like it. I get hired to handle problems with people I
personally don't have problems with. What's more, the opposing party
also has their own lawyer, who's getting paid to have problems with me.
Every day, I go up against people whose primary job is to make sure that
I lose. When it comes to a jury trial, the stakes can't be any higher.
How I communicate, and how I teach my client to communicate, can mean
the difference between recovering their livelihood and losing it
forever. Each case is a new lesson, whether I'm deposing witnesses,
cross-examining parties, or giving arguments before a judge or jury. My
entire purpose is to run toward conflict. If you're inclined to believe
that I learned my communication skills in law school, don't. Law school
teaches you how to apply the law: principles of contracts, torts,
constitutional law, and state and federal rules of procedure ---all
important. But you won't sit in a class on how to speak to each other
with empathy. You won't hear a lesson on how to defuse a heated
argument. Law school teaches you how to read the law. It doesn't teach
you how to read people. I had to learn that part myself.

"Do you yike it?!" my sister, Sarah, squealed through her pacifier as
she brought me the fifth round of invisible pancakes. As the oldest of
four, I loved being the big brother. By the time I was thirteen, my bond
with my siblings was so strong that they obeyed me almost better than
they did my parents. I was like a mother hen wherever we went. And by
the time I was sixteen, I was driving them to school while going over
their spelling words. To be clear, my parents are loving and wonderful.
I was only as good as I was because they poured so much of themselves
into me those first four years before my sister was born. I also just
truly enjoyed the responsibility of being the big brother. Being the
oldest supposedly leads to more emotional stability, initiative, and the
like. But for me, it taught me to hone communication fundamentals at an
early age. I quickly learned to acknowledge Sarah by pretending to
gobble up the invisible food while smiling and saying, "Mm-hmm,
delicious." I found that words of kindness worked better at getting her
to open up than words of anger. My younger brother Jonathan would say my
name repeatedly (they call me Bubba, a southern term of endearment for
the eldest boy) and stammer until he got his sentences out. I learned
that if I patiently waited and repeated his words back to him while
nodding my head, he felt understood. He also couldn't say his consonants
for a long time, only vowels. I naturally became his interpreter,
identifying nonverbal mannerisms and foreseeing situations that would
frustrate him before they happened. Jacob, my youngest brother, was the
most emotionally intense of the three. He felt his emotions big, quickly
losing his temper. I figured out that if I slowed my words and lowered
my voice, so would he. I learned to let him feel his feelings without me
taking them personally. That sometimes a hug said more than any words I
could say. Each sibling had a unique personality that took a special
approach, a special touch to connect with them on a deeper level. One of
the most critical skills that I developed as the oldest was my ability
to mediate and resolve conflict. If two of my siblings began arguing
over our sister's Polly Pocket, I'd quickly stop the yelling, have them
each give their side of the story, and then make the judgment call on
whose turn it was and what the compromise would be. And it worked. I
became proficient at teaching my siblings how to communicate their needs
and understand the needs of one another. Serving as the role model for
communication between my siblings was daily life. Now married with two
kids, it's still daily life. I've been the communicator in every phase,
every relationship, every friend group. Maybe you think it's just a
knack for talking. I know it to be something more. Every night as I was
growing up, my dad sat on the edge of my bed, leaned over, and
whispered, "Dear God, give Jefferson wisdom and always be his friend." I
believe in the power of prayer. And I believe that without my parents'
prayer, you wouldn't be reading this book. In 2020, I made partner at a
prestigious defense firm. But despite this achievement, I was
professionally depressed. I always came back to the same metaphor: I
felt like I was running with a parachute. I was billing and working
cases, yes, but creatively, I was getting nowhere. To make things
harder, my dad worked at the same firm. When I first told him I had
thoughts of going off on my own, let's just say it didn't go well.
Honestly, it didn't go well for the next twenty conversations and even
up to when I announced it to the firm. He fought for me to stay. Those
were hard talks. I did two things in January 2022 that would change
everything. First, I opened my own law firm, Fisher Firm, handling
personal injury cases. I didn't have an office or an assistant---heck, I
didn't even have a printer. I surfed coffee shops with my laptop and
borrowed friends' empty offices. I quickly signed up clients, and man,
did it feel amazing. I got to help real people with real problems. I'd
cut the parachute, and I was finally making up ground. Second, I made my
first social media post giving communication advice. Originally, I
wanted to use it to generate leads. I saw so many lawyers posting on
social media doing the only thing they knew: selling. They saw it as the
new billboard frontier, telling people what to do and who to call after
an accident. I even tried some of it myself. But afterward, it just
didn't feel right. My mind flashed to those attorneys whose faces are
splattered on billboards, seen holding hammers, flamethrowers, and
boxing gloves, saying outrageous things like "Have you been injured? I'm
the Texas Cheese Grater! Call me and get that cheddar now!" Blerf. I
shuddered. I can't stand that stuff. Most of all, that wasn't me. I
chose a different path. Instead of selling myself, I would provide value
for free. Not about what would benefit me, but about what would benefit
other people. And this time, I would do it being authentically me, the
person I've been all along. Jefferson. How could I truly help people? It
needed to be something relatable, a message of light and good into
people's homes and workplaces. My mind flashed back to my parents'
question to me whenever I didn't know what to say to someone: "Well,
what do you want them to know?" The answer hit me like a ton of bricks.
I'd tell them what I know better than anyone else I knew. I'd help them
learn how to communicate. I didn't have a cool desk setup or a studio to
record in with a fancy camera, but I had my truck and my phone. That'd
have to do. I turned my phone selfie-style and pressed record. I decided
on the fly that it would be "How to argue like a lawyer pt.1" and that
I'd boil it down to three easy points. In the front seat of my empty
truck, I talked to the screen of my phone about how to keep your
questions shorter, how to be less emotionally reactive, and how too much
cursing was like over-seasoning your food. I'd run across something
previously that said that a video needed to have a call to action . So,
at the end of the video, I said, "Try that and follow me." For whatever
reason, I couldn't tell you why, I put my hand up to my mouth at the
last second when I said it. I decided to roll with it. I took a big gulp
and posted the forty-seven-second clip to social media. I didn't expect
anything to happen. So far, all my videos had zero views. In fact, I'd
even googled "Why do my videos have 0 views?" and "How do I make a
reel?" What happened next was nothing I was prepared for. After an hour
passed, my "how to argue" video started ramping up in views, quickly
reaching into the thousands. The next day, it was in the millions. I
didn't realize, of course, that it would also mean that millions of
people would see my daughter's pink car seat and my son's sippy cup in
the back, along with my thoughtless fashion choice---an unstructured
polo with a suit jacket. Who gets dressed thinking they're going to be
seen by millions of people that day? People didn't seem to care. It was
where I was in my life. It made them feel like I was speaking directly
to them, with no upsell, no gimmicks. It was real. "What do I do now?" I
asked a friend. She replied, "You make more." So I did. That year, I
gained more than five million social media followers, including hundreds
of celebrities and public figures, all while using my iPhone from my
driver's seat to give communication advice. Always the same way---alone,
in my car, wherever I could park between leaving the law firm and
arriving home. Never scripted, always posted on the same day that I
filmed. No video editor or fancy graphics or trendy captions. Just me,
holding my phone and being myself. And despite doing everything alone in
my car, I soon found myself in front of thousands of real people giving
keynotes at conferences and speaking to organizations asking to learn
from my communication techniques. I even spoke at NASA. Every time I
spoke, all I could think was, "What are all y'all doing here?" I reached
250,000 email subscribers wanting my weekly communication tip, and I
signed a book deal with Penguin Random House to start writing the book
you're holding now. I launched *The Jefferson Fisher Podcast*, which
shot straight to the top of the charts and is the number one
communication podcast in the world. I've also grown an amazing online
community filled with resources and classes that equip people with
practical ways to improve their communication. My videos have received
over half a billion views across all platforms. I'm blessed and humbled
to have received some of the kindest, most thoughtful daily messages of
thanks and gratitude. I can't believe I get to help others in this way,
much less that I'm typing these words. I still practice law every day,
now helping people from all over the US with their personal injuries and
connecting them to attorneys I trust. I still record a short video every
day. I still say, "Try that and follow me." Millions have tried it and
followed me. I say that from a deep place of gratitude. I never dreamed
this is where it would go. But the dreams didn't stop there. Five months
after I opened Fisher Firm, my dad left his firm of thirty-five years to
join me, his son, for no other reason than simply for us to practice law
together. "You still got room for the old man?" he asked with a smile. I
was speechless. There was nothing I could've ever wanted more. My eyes
still well up with happy tears now as I write about it.

## Introduction

Not long after uploading my first video, I started to receive
messages--- thousands of them. So many that there was no way I could
read, let alone respond to, all of them. The messages were from
followers of my content asking me for advice. They weren't asking for my
guidance on big philosophical questions about religion or politics, or
even legal stuff. They wanted my advice on the day-to-day, micro moments
about real things that real people struggle with, everything from
mundane issues to stories that'll rip your heart out. What do I say to a
superior who always puts down my ideas? What do I say to my adult
daughter who I haven't seen in years? What do I say to my partner, who
always has to be right? After thousands of messages like these, the one
thing I've learned is that no matter how they frame the question, their
problem isn't what to say---it's how to say it. Whenever I get one of
these questions, the first thing I ask is what my parents always asked
me: "Well, what do you want them to know?" So far, I've never received
back, "I don't know." I always get a quick answer. People already know
what they want to say, because deep down, it's a reflection of what
they're already feeling: I want them to know it hurts me. I want them to
know I need space. I want them to know why I'm upset. The feelings
reveal themselves naturally. But articulating those feelings to another
person? Not so easy. It's deflating, really, how something so simple can
feel so out of reach. If you picked up this book, chances are you're
reaching for the same thing: real solutions for real problems. You don't
need the *what*, you need the *how*. How do you express yourself in a
way that respects both your perspective and the perspective of the other
person? How do you stand up for yourself without losing the
relationship? How do you voice your thoughts with authenticity and
empathy but still show that you have a backbone? The easy answer you're
looking for is connection. The more honest answer you deserve is in the
pages that lie ahead.

### Why I Wrote This Book

I wrote this book for three reasons:

1. Because my social media followers asked for it. To me, it's their
   book.
2. To teach you what I know that will improve your next conversation.
3. To preserve a piece of me for my kids and my family.

Before you crack into it, I need you to understand something important.
The communication skills in this book aren't borrowed principles.
Outside of a few studies and commentary from other scientific
fields---psychology, neuroscience, behavioral science---you won't be
seeing many sources. What you're about to read is knowledge collected
from my life experiences and how I communicate. I am not a therapist. I
am not a psychologist. If anything I say in this book somehow conflicts
in some way with one of these specialists, believe them over me. I'm not
going to ask you to identify your attachment style or encourage you to
take a quiz to find out which conflict personality you have. If you're
looking to take a deep dive into the latest statistics or a case study
about how the social dynamic patterns of bees can help you communicate,
I'm not the guy for you. What I've written are lessons from my daily
grind in the real-world trenches of arguments, disagreements, heated
debates, and difficult conversations. What I offer is down-to-earth,
homegrown advice outside of the textbooks and lectures. And maybe that's
just what more of the world needs.

### How This Book Will Help You

While I am a trial lawyer, you won't find a speck of law in what you're
about to read. This book isn't about my profession, or even about
lawyers. It's about how to speak boldly, with your chin up, to embrace
the vulnerability that comes with laying all your cards on the table.
How to say what you mean and mean what you say. It's about choosing
courage over comfort, even when your voice shakes. Speaking directly
doesn't mean you lack empathy or consideration for the other person's
feelings. Being direct means that you have the self-assurance that you
can respect the other person, as well as yourself, enough to communicate
your needs openly without fear. You don't have to be an assertive person
to speak assertively. The words do it for you. That's what this book
will give you: the words. In this book, you'll get answers to questions
that so many people wrestle with: How do I talk to someone who's
defensive? What do I say when someone belittles me? How do I assert my
boundaries? To get you there, I've broken it down into two parts. Part
one tells you how to first connect with yourself. That sounds woo-woo, I
know. But it's not. It's about where to go in your mind when conflict
appears, and most important, how to leverage the mindset for better
outcomes. Part two teaches you how to use that leverage to connect with
other people. How you connect looks different based on context, whether
it's working through a difficult conversation or needing to stand up for
yourself. Whatever context you find yourself in, I've created three
rules that will build the connection for you:

1. Say it with control.
2. Say it with confidence.
3. Say it to connect.

Behind each rule are proven tactics you can use immediately. Throughout
this book, I'll show you what confident communication looks, sounds, and
feels like. You'll learn from real-life stories from my personal and
professional experiences. You'll also see yourself in hypothetical
conversations that hit close to home. You'll learn what to say and what
not to say, and of course, how to say it. After reading the pages ahead,
you're going to be able to remove the difficult from difficult
conversations, making space for more real in your life. Real
friendships, real connection, and real growth. And I don't just mean at
home or in relationships. You'll find the real you starting to show up
at work and in meetings. You'll respond to texts and emails differently.
People will know where you stand. You'll watch your confidence turn into
credibility--- and that, I can't wait to see.

### How to Apply This Book

While reading this book or watching any of my videos, you may ask: How
will I remember all this when I need it? My answer is simple: you won't.
You can't read everything and expect to immediately apply everything.
That's too much at once, like trying to drink from a firehose. You'll
set yourself up for failure. Instead, pick one. Pick one tip that
resonates with you and apply it as soon as you can. For example, let's
say the lesson that hits home with you is the one about
over-apologizing, in chapter seven. Focus on that one lesson. Find ways
to keep it close to your thoughts, like writing it down somewhere you
can see, saying it out loud to yourself, or telling a close friend who
can keep you accountable. Then, start using it. Catch yourself every
time you give a needless "sorry" and edit it out of every sentence you
say, email you type, or message you text. Commit yourself to that one
rule. Then, and only then, when you can go a week without a single
unnecessary apology, should you move on to another lesson that also
resonates with you. This book includes tips I've handpicked, from my
most popular and viral videos to exclusive takeaways I've never shared
before. If you're reading this because you follow me on social media,
hi, it's still me. I'm proud to finally give you something tangible to
mark up, tear up, and make yours. I know you'll find it worth the wait.
It's time to say more of what you mean and mean more of what you say.
It's time to communicate your needs openly without fear. So come hop in
to the passenger seat, and I'll bring the IBC Root Beer and beef jerky.
You're well on your way to making your next conversation the one that
changes everything.

## Part I: The Essentials

I don't need to convince you that communication matters. You know that.
What I do need to persuade you of, however, is the reach of it. Your
words have a ripple effect.

It doesn't matter how insignificant you think you are---whether you
think you're a somebody or a nobody, your words have power beyond
anything you'll live to see. How you talk to your coworker, or the
person behind the counter, affects how they talk to their friends and
their family when they go home. How you talk to your kids affects how
they will talk to their kids. Your words don't just matter now. They
matter to generations of people you'll never meet. People you'll never
know exist. The right sentence to the right person can change lives.
Yes, actions can speak louder than words, but they're not a replacement
for them. You can't call yourself a kind person if you don't use kind
words. Who do your words say you are? The ripples keep going long after
the rock hits the water. What you'll learn in The Essentials is a
mindset that prepares you to create waves of positive impact that will
resonate through your relationships to last a lifetime, and many times
over.

### Chapter 1: Never Win an Argument

"I don't trust you as far as I can throw you!" he bellowed. In all
honesty, it was a compliment. He could've thrown me pretty far. In his
tan coveralls with a white oval patch that had "LaPray" embroidered in
black on the upper left pocket, Bobby LaPray glared at me with enough
heat to burn a hole through my suit jacket. I generally don't know what
someone looks like before I meet them at their deposition. Whatever I
pictured Bobby LaPray looking like, it wasn't this. Sitting at the
conference room table waiting for people to arrive, I looked up to see a
half human, half giant. His outline took up the whole doorway.
Naturally, I stood up and walked over to him to shake his hand and
introduce myself. "Jefferson Fisher," I said with a smile. "Hmph.
Bobby," he muttered. Now, I'm not a small guy. I'm over six feet tall.
But I barely came up to Bobby LaPray's chest. He was an absolute
mountain. As we shook hands, the squeeze from his ginormous callused
hands left an imprint on mine like a scene from a Tom and Jerry cartoon.
I'd never been around someone so physically intimidating. The case
involved a bar fight, and I was representing a bystander who had gotten
caught up in the scuffle. As part of the case, I needed to depose Bobby
LaPray, a witness to the events. In a deposition, I get the chance to
ask people questions under oath, typically to learn what they know
before they testify at trial. Clockwise around the antique conference
room table sat the court reporter writing everything down, Bobby LaPray,
the opposing attorney, and me. After asking Bobby to raise his right
hand and placing him under oath, the court reporter gave her customary
nod for me to begin. I asked Bobby LaPray routine questions about his
background and what had led up to the fight. They were easy, open-ended
questions: What time did you arrive? Who did you talk to first? Did you
see so-and-so or do this-and-that? It's common to use such questions to
build a chronology of the events from a witness's particular point of
view. At all times, I made sure I was kind and polite---90 percent
because that's my personality and 10 percent out of sheer
self-preservation. He was not someone I wanted upset. But no matter how
many softball questions I asked, Bobby LaPray was becoming increasingly
agitated. I had seen it enough times in my experience to know. His
eyebrows began furrowing with each answer. A sign of negative emotion.
His breathing got heavier as he switched from exhaling through his nose
to exhaling through his mouth. A sign of increased stress. He started
wringing his massive hands together as he spoke. A sign of anxiety. It
didn't matter what I did. It seemed as if just my existence in the room
offended him. I could sense the tension around the table heightening the
more displeased Bobby LaPray looked. Like I was blowing up a balloon and
it was about to pop. Finally, I asked him, "Mr. LaPray, would you like a
break?" The room went silent. "No," Bobby LaPray said, clearing his
throat. "But I got something to say." His words rang out louder than
necessary. So much so that the court reporter jumped. I quickly glanced
at the other attorney, who couldn't have been younger than sixty-five.
He looked more nervous than I was. When we locked eyes, he gave me a
wide-eyed look and slowly shook his head as if to say, "If this goes
south, you're on your own." I turned back to look at my witness.
"Yessir?" I inquired. Bobby LaPray took a big breath in. "You can cut
all this buddy-buddy stuff." Except he didn't say "stuff." "You lawyers
are the worst thing to happen to America," he continued. "All you do is
lie." He slammed his hand on the table, then drew it upward with a
pointed finger at me, saying, "So go on and ask me your stupid
questions. Just know, I don't trust you as far as I can throw you! I'm
tellin' you, lawyers are the worst thing to happen to this country," he
repeated. The court reporter gave an anxious look. At that moment, a
hundred thoughts raced through my mind. First, I'm well accustomed to
this derogatory stereotype of attorneys, especially personal injury
attorneys. I try very hard to work against it, though it's a reputation
that some attorneys, frankly, rightly deserve. So a put-down joke or
snide remark about my profession is nothing new. I understood. Second, I
didn't blame him for not trusting me. Not because I was trying to
mislead him, but because to his mind, I represented all the bad things
he ever thought he knew or had heard of about the law, lawyers, and "the
system." Of course he had no reason to trust me. I understood. It was
the "stupid questions" that got me. I know good and well that I do many,
many stupid things every day. But what I don't do is ask stupid
questions. In that instant, a wave of anger surged through me. I felt my
whole body go tense. My ears got hot as I shifted my weight in my seat.
I could sense that I was becoming defensive. My questions up to that
point had barely scratched the surface. Nothing about them had been
difficult or even uncomfortable.

*Stupid? I'll show him stupid*, I thought. I felt myself wanting to come
back with quips about his size in relation to his intelligence. Just a
few well-placed cutting words and I'd best him. I tried to tell myself
that his reaction was all I needed to know about who he truly was. But
I'd been wrong before. When I was in third grade, my school started a
reading buddy program, pairing strong readers with those who hadn't
learned yet. That's how I got paired with Evan. Twice a week, we'd sit
on beanbags during our library period. I'd listen as he would struggle
to read aloud books like *Brown Bear, Brown Bear, What Do You See?* by
Bill Martin Jr. Evan was physically much bigger than I was. Back then, I
had a hard time understanding how he was so big but couldn't read. When
he'd come across a word he didn't know, my job was to help him sound it
out. But he still struggled. So I figured out ways to explain things to
him differently, like associating words with memorable phrases or
creating metaphors on the fly with whatever was near us in the room. I
got good at crafting little tricks that engaged Evan's interests, making
harder ideas more memorable. Sometimes we'd do our reading sessions
during our lunch period. While I'd pull out my lunch in a brown bag with
a handwritten smiley face on it that my momma had made me that day, I'd
watch as a teacher would bring him a tray from the cafeteria. Evan's
momma didn't make his lunch. I began to notice that his clothes never
seemed to fit him, like they were three sizes too big. Once, when we
were going over *throw*, *threw*, and *through*, I tried to help by
relating it to how he'd throw a ball to his dad. Evan flatly replied, "I
don't know who my dad is." I vividly remember feeling as though I
couldn't move my mouth. I was speechless. My heart broke for him. I'd
later learn that Evan had been living with his grandparents. His dad had
left shortly after he was born. His mom was in jail. But in third grade,
I had no grasp of his reality. No clue about the true struggles he was
facing. With two loving parents who read and told stories to me at
night, I knew then that he was living in a world I knew nothing about.
As we continued over that fall semester and into the next year, Evan's
reading level improved with each session until he was reading all on his
own. I couldn't have been prouder. Exposure to Evan's inner struggles
was another defining moment in my life at an early age. And it was a
lesson I've never forgotten.

Zinging a put-down at ten-foot-tall Bobby wouldn't help anything. It
would only hurt---if not the deposition, then most definitely my face.
And besides, my client's case needed this information. *Put it down,
Jefferson*, I said to myself. I let out a long, silent breath through my
nose. As I dropped the tension in my shoulders, my thoughts of
retaliation faded. What I became more curious about, however, was the
disproportionality of his reaction. Anytime someone takes a level one
conversation and jumps it up to level ten, it's telling. And what it
tells you is that there's another conversation happening inside that
person's head that you weren't invited to. Something hidden has taken
over their filter and is now driving their reactions. You're only seeing
the tip of the iceberg.

*What else is at play? Who am I really talking to?* I intended to find
out. Having let about ten seconds pass from his last words---"lawyers
are the worst thing to happen to America"---I gave a soft smile and said
slowly, "Well, maybe you're right." I waited another ten seconds as I
sat back in my chair and moved my gaze around the room. When I was
ready, I leaned forward and put my forearms on the table. "Tell me,
please. What's been your biggest struggle this year?" I asked. Bobby
LaPray's eyes looked up to meet mine. "Say what?" he scoffed. I
repeated, "What's been your biggest struggle---personal struggle---this
year?" At that question, Bobby LaPray slowly dropped all emotion from
his face. He got very still. I stayed quiet while his eyes seemed to
search for the words. After a while, he finally spoke. His words
stumbled out, choppy and hesitant, like he was embarrassed to mention
it. "I, uh, I had to put my mother in an assisted living facility last
month. My ---my dad has long passed, and my brother moves around a lot
as a roughneck. So I'm the only one. The only one here to really help
her. It's a lot of paperwork and legal stuff I don't understand." Unlike
the Bobby LaPray who had angrily run me up one side and down the other
not two minutes ago, this Bobby LaPray was different. When he talked, he
looked defeated. He looked scared. And somehow, he looked small. Letting
his words sink in, a few seconds later I responded gently, "I'm sorry. I
can't imagine what that's like." He nodded slightly with pressed lips.
"But what I can tell you is"---I made sure to catch his eye---"you're a
good son." Immediately, Bobby LaPray threw his face down to keep me from
seeing it. His huge shoulders shook. And like ice melting off a rock,
big Bobby LaPray began to cry. I quickly told the court reporter to go
off the record for a break. "It's okay," I reassured him. "I'm just
going to sit here with you." Through tears, Bobby LaPray poured out all
his fears over his mother's health. He told me about the intimidating
letters threatening to foreclose his mother's house that he'd been
receiving from none other than...lawyers. He shared how the banks and
government were asking him for things he didn't understand. He felt
helpless. He wished his father were still alive. My heart broke for him.
He was living in a world I knew nothing about. I thought of Evan. Bobby
LaPray had been holding the weight of it all by himself. For twenty
minutes, we sat there as he let it all out. With his attorney's
permission, I asked for Bobby LaPray's email address. Sitting there, I
cc'd him on an email from my phone to a local colleague who handled
elder law and estate planning. She replied minutes later, happily
agreeing to set up a meeting with Bobby LaPray the next Monday. "Thank
you," he told me. "Absolutely," I said. "You good?" I asked. He took a
big sniff, wiped his nose with his sleeve, and sat up. "Yeah," he
answered with a weak grin. "I'm ready." And for the rest of the
deposition, I spoke to the real Bobby LaPray. His answers were direct
and forthcoming. His words were more lighthearted. He became more
animated, even cracked a few jokes. He no longer looked like he was
ready to launch me into oblivion. "All done," I said finally. "That's
all the questions I have. Thank you for your time." As we all stood up,
I walked toward the door and stuck out my hand. I braced for another
painful death grip. Instead, at the last second, Bobby LaPray opened up
his arms and bear-hugged me. All I could do was smile and say, "Be
good." I didn't look, but I'm fairly sure my feet weren't touching the
ground.

#### The Person You See

I've had countless interactions like that one throughout my life.
Sometimes the other person is the Bobby LaPray. Other times, I'm the
Bobby LaPray. But why does it happen? How is it that by dropping the
idea of winning an argument, you get more of what you want? What is it
about connecting to the other person that gives you the high ground? And
how can you tap into that strength in your own communication? It's easy
to believe that communication should be cut-and-dried. A world where you
say, "You're wrong," and the other person immediately replies, "Why yes,
yes, I most certainly am." A place where, when someone says, "I'm fine,"
the only possible interpretation of the phrase is that they're totally
and unequivocally fine. Where what you see on the outside is all there
is to someone on the inside, and the boot always fits. That's how you
think it should be. That's what you want it to be. But that's not the
way it is. When you tell someone that they're wrong, they become more
convinced that they're right. When someone says they're fine, they're
often anything but. It's never as simple as matching stereotypes. Given
these problems, I want to go ahead and acknowledge a central theme of
this book, and I hope you let this coin drop from your head to your
heart:

> The person you see isn't the person you're talking to.

Think of a river and its undercurrent. On the surface, your eyes and
ears can pick up a person's physical cues that shape your perception and
judgments about them. But what's happening below the surface is where
their real truth runs. For instance:

- The coworker you see is agitated and impatient. The coworker you're
  > talking to didn't sleep well last night because he's worried about
  > convincing his brother to go to rehab.

- The cashier you see is scattered and inattentive. The cashier you're
  > talking to is worried about affording her kids' back-to-school
  > supplies.

- The spouse you see is tense and short-fused. The spouse you're talking
  > to had a horrible day at work starting with an email from a rude
  > client.

- Or, in my case, the mountain of a man I saw was aggressive and
  > defensive. The Bobby LaPray I was talking to, on the other hand,
  > felt alone and worried about his mother.

It's this other person you're talking to---the person you don't
know---who you need to reach for when conflict starts to tear you apart.
Understanding that there's more beneath the surface is one thing, but
figuring out how to connect with their deeper self is another. How
exactly are you supposed to reach them?

#### The Struggle You Hear

When Bobby called my questions stupid, everything inside me wanted to
prove him wrong. In that instant, the needs of the case took a back seat
to my needs. My desire to be seen as right blinded me to any other
options. I wanted to win. It's what I'm expected to do. "Oh, you're an
attorney? You must win a lot of arguments." I hear it all the time. It's
also not true. Thanks to the countless books out there claiming to teach
you how to win every argument, that's all anyone thinks you're supposed
to do. Win. So let me tell you now. If that's why you're reading this
book, go ahead and return it. The sales pitch of winning an argument is
overused and overpromised. That's not this book, and I'll tell you why.
For one, you can win an argument and still be wrong. And second, even if
you win, you still come up empty-handed. Winning an argument is a losing
game. Winning means that you've likely lost something far more
valuable---their trust, their respect, or worse, the connection. The
only reward you've won is their contempt. And for what? The argument
ends. The conversation is over. You won, congratulations. Now what do
you got? The same unresolved issue at the cost of hurt feelings and
awkward silence. Most likely, you still have to find a way to
communicate with this person. You still have to live with them, to work
with them. Depending on what you said, you may now be the one who owes
an apology. Any feeling of pride is short-lived compared to the lasting
damage to the relationship. Trial attorneys don't even win arguments.
They don't get to choose their clients' facts. They don't get to choose
which law to follow. Everything has to pass through a filter of
admissibility, then it's up to the judge or jury to apply the law to the
evidence. It's more about giving the facts a voice than it is about
winning an argument. Competition in communication has convinced society
that the world is divided into "right" and "wrong," "winners" and
"losers." After a political debate, the first question someone asks the
next morning is always, "Who won?" But if we go back in time to the
ancient Greeks, discourse had nothing to do with winning. A debate over
opposing issues was a vehicle for pursuing truth. Exposing the weakness
in another's argument was to strengthen and refine it, not dismiss it.
Debates were known to last for days, even weeks, to give each person
time to obtain perspective and explore divisive issues. Today, the
tendency is to do just the opposite. Rather than allowing disagreement
to open you up to learning from another's perspective, you shut it down.
Instead of refining your own understanding, you treat it as a threat. We
run to social media like it's our own personal megaphone to voice just
how much we disagree. Be honest. How many times has a social media post
disparaging your point of view ever changed your mind? And how many
times has something you posted that criticized someone else's opinion
ever changed theirs? Never. The world turns, the news cycle moves on,
and the next day, no one cares. So, what then? What did you prove? The
fastest way to lose your peace of mind is to give someone a piece of
yours. Beating out someone in an argument may feed your ego, but it'll
still leave you hungry. Rarely, if ever, does winning in communication
lead to better things in your life. That's why I care enough about you
to tell you the truth:

> Never win an argument.

Whether it's an argument, a heated discussion, or slight friction in
conversation, your goal isn't to "win." It's to *unravel*. Start at the
loose ends until you understand the heart of the matter. There you'll
find the knot. This is a book of knots. The hard stuff in social
relationships that, admit it, you'd rather skip over. Untying crossed
wires takes time, takes emotion, takes effort. That's what conflict in
communication represents: a struggle. An argument is a window into
another person's struggle. In every difficult conversation, there's a
moment when someone---whether it's you or the other person---hits a
snag. Maybe you don't understand what they're trying to say. Maybe
you're in a bad mood. Maybe you disagree. It's not the clash of
opinions; it's the clash of worlds, of the very way you see things.
Behind every harsh and uncut word, there's a backstory, a why. And if
you can find the discipline to get to that, if you can peel back the
layers of the argument to discern the struggle, the fear, or the hope
hiding underneath, that's where real communication begins. Because at
the end of the day, it's not about the argument. It's about seeing
through the keyhole into another person's world and realizing that
maybe, just maybe, the win you thought you wanted isn't what you needed
after all.

#### The Challenge to Accept

Most people understand that success comes from seeing failure not as a
setback, but as a stepping stone. Embracing failure is part of the
process. You learn from your mistakes to grow stronger. Failures to
communicate, as in disagreements and arguments, do the same thing. They
lead to success because they reveal areas of improvement, offering
insights into how you can enrich your interactions. The bigger the
conversation, the bigger the need to handle conflict effectively. When
done right, conflict isn't a fight. It's an opportunity. It's a catalyst
for real, meaningful connection, if you're willing to see it. What life
experiences have shaped how you see conflict? When you were a kid,
defiantly shouting "No!" or bombarding adults with "Why?" was your way
of figuring things out. Cause and effect. As a teenager, those simple
childhood reactions turned into more complicated questions about finding
your place and your identity apart from your family. The clothes you
wore, the music you listened to, even the clique you hung around, were
statements of who you wanted to be. Stepping into adulthood,
disagreements became less about asserting individuality and more about
coexisting with other people. Your conversations turned to topics like
children, career paths, and mortgages. Or in my case, what vacuum to buy
and whether that piece of furniture I found in my parents' garage still
had "good bones." As an adult, the stakes change. Your responsibilities
grow as you have to think collectively, now responsible for people other
than yourself, such as aging parents or your own children. You take
interest in broader issues like politics, news, and global affairs.
Despite your age, things may feel even more uncertain. When that
happens, you tend to fall back to what you know---your lived experiences
and the behaviors modeled for you growing up. Ask yourself: How did
watching arguments in my childhood influence the way I argue now? If
yelling and aggression were the go-to methods for conflict in your home
growing up, you might find yourself thinking that's just how things are
done, even if you know it's not the best way to get your point across.
On the flip side, if you came from a place where everyone tiptoed around
disagreements to save face or avoided conversations out of fear of what
the neighbors might think, diving headfirst into arguments might make
you feel uncomfortable. Take this one time I stayed over at a friend's
house during the summer as a kid. His parents got into a massive
shouting match right in front of us--- doors slamming, the works. I
remember being absolutely mortified. I grew up with parents who kept
their arguments private, either hashing things out in their room or
waiting until we were asleep. So, seeing his parents go at it, I was
positive that a divorce was unfolding before my eyes. But my friend? He
didn't even blink. To him, it was just a typical Tuesday night.

Looking back, maybe you're not thrilled with how conflict was handled
around you. Maybe you have bad memories of seeing arguments bring out
the worst in the people you loved. Maybe you've caught yourself echoing
their words or mirroring their actions---even in the little things, like
how you move your hands or the tone of your voice. You've gotten to a
point in your life where you're beginning to realize that what you
observed wasn't that healthy. And you can't help but wonder, would
things have gone easier for you in your own life if you'd seen better
ways to deal with conflict? If that's you, then I'm asking you to take
on the challenge and break the cycle.

Stop seeing arguments as something to win but as an opportunity to
understand the person behind the words. Stop hearing only what's said
and start hearing what's felt. Build the discipline to connect to the
person in front of you. Embrace the failures to communicate and learn
from them. Reach success by using each misstep as a stepping-stone, and
make room for more positive and real in your life---like a bear hug from
a man who until recently wanted to shot-put you.

Now, it's highly likely that the themes in the pages ahead won't be
anything new to you. You know you should speak with confidence and
control your emotions. You know you should avoid getting defensive and
stand up for yourself. The question you have is "Yes, but what does that
*look like*?" Well, it starts with what you say next.

#### CHAPTER SUMMARY

- The person you see isn't the person you're talking to. Every person
  > has a surface and a depth. Often, the emotions you hear in someone's
  > voice are not bids for disagreement but bids for connection.

- Don't buy into the lie that you need to win an argument. When you seek
  > to win, you tend to lose much more, like the other person's trust or
  > respect. Instead, view arguments as a window into another person's
  > struggle.

- Conflict can be a catalyst for positive changes in your life. To
  > harness it, you have to be willing to connect with the person
  > opposite you. Turning your conflicts into connections paves the way
  > for a more fulfilling, meaningful life. All you need is in what you
  > say next.

### Chapter 2: Your Next Conversation

Bzzz.

You look down at your phone to see a text you weren't expecting: "I'm
ready to talk." It's a friend---at least, you're pretty sure it's a
friend. A few weeks ago, the two of you had a fight that ended with you
calling them selfish and attention-seeking. They called you dismissive
and controlling. Neither of you wanted to give in and reach out to the
other. But you have so many friends together that it's impossible not to
run into each other. You're still not speaking. Honestly, it's gotten
pretty awkward. Rereading the text, you almost feel like you won the
holdout, but you were ready to talk last week. Now you're ready to put
your pride aside. "Me too," you respond. "Lunch tomorrow?" A few seconds
later your friend replies, "Sounds good. Talk soon." Fast-forward to the
two of you sitting across from each other at lunch. After small talk,
you break the ice. "What you said really hurt me." "I hurt you?" your
friend says in an accusing tone. You repeat yourself. "Yes, what you
said hurt me. You didn't even care." Your friend nearly cuts you off.
"Well, I wouldn't have said it if you hadn't reacted the way that you
did."

*Wait*, you think to yourself, *that's not what's supposed to happen.
That's not what they were supposed to say*. In your mind, you had
pictured your friend apologizing and realizing how terrible they'd been.
Slowly shaking your head, your nostrils flare and your eyebrows point
down. *You want to go there? Fine.*

You fire back, "Me? No. You started this." Your friend quickly responds,
"I just find it funny how you..." And there it goes. The conversation
sinks right back down to where it was weeks before. You tell yourself,
*This was such a mistake. I'm so stupid for thinking that they'd do
anything other than think about themself.* Yet you still argue. You know
you should probably surrender some ground to try to salvage the
conversation, but no. Now it's the principle of it. *I'm right*, you
remind yourself. All the while, your friend is thinking and feeling the
same thing. After a few more minutes of back-and-forth, your friend
says, "You know what? Forget it. I knew this was going to be a waste of
time," and abruptly leaves. You're left sitting with the check and a
half-eaten lunch with no desire to finish it. You wonder if the
friendship is over for good. You wonder if you even care. But as soon as
you have that thought, you realize you do care and you're not ready to
give up. You wish you'd had the right words the first time.

#### The Power of Your Next Conversation

The only thing guaranteed in communication is that you're bound to say
the wrong thing. The good news is that it doesn't have to stay wrong.
That's why your next conversation often matters more than your first.
You can change everything in your next conversation. Yes, initial
conversations, like meeting someone for the first time and making that
first impression, are important. But it's the next conversation that
tests whether your first impression will remain a lasting one. That job
interview, that first date, that initial meeting, everyone has their
guard up. Everyone is on their best behavior. Over time, the shine wears
off, and the person you thought you knew may turn out to be someone
completely different. That exciting new hire turned out to be a terrible
team player. That person you liked enough for a second date said
something that has ensured there won't be a third. And that project
meeting where everyone said they liked your plan? Turns out no one was
really crazy about it. There's something about these follow-up
conversations that makes people feel more comfortable voicing what they
tiptoed around initially. In this way, next conversations can be closer
to the truth. They're also more healing. Take a heated argument, for
example. Tensions mount and the two of you may begin shouting. After
you've exhausted enough energy, the momentum of the conversation slows
to a halt. It may be minutes. It may even be years. But eventually you
find your way back to each other for the next conversation. The second
time around, you tend to speak with lower voices and fewer reactions, or
say things like "What I meant to say was..." You both want to mend and
restore. The next conversation has the benefit of hindsight and
reflection, an understanding of what was missing from the first
go-around. There's so much you can do in the next conversation: reframe,
apologize, laugh over it. You know this. One reason you may be reading
this book is because you've already had plenty of conversations---too
many conversations---with that difficult person in your life. You're
here because you need to know how to handle the next one. Who will your
next conversation be with? What conversation needs to happen but hasn't
yet? Throughout this book, envision applying these methods to the
various opportunities for communication in your life. Everything you
want to say, and how you want to say it, can be found in the next
conversation.

#### Why Your Conversations Need Goals

There is, however, one major caution with next conversations: don't rely
on the way they play out in your head. You can rehearse that difficult
talk with your friend a dozen times and still come up short. Why is
that? Why do conversations go so perfectly in your mind, only to crash
and burn in real life? The answer is because your goal set you up for
disappointment. When you choose goals for conversations that are
unrealistic or unmanageable, you're expecting too much from the other
person, including yourself. I know it sounds weird to say this, but
you're setting the bar too high. You're swinging for the fences when all
you need is a base hit. Instead of telling yourself, "I must fix
everything right now," or "Everything must go back to exactly how it was
before," make your goal more reachable. It can be as simple as "I want
to hear their perspective without getting defensive," or "I want to
listen without interrupting." Rather than demanding the moon, take that
one small step toward understanding each other better. At the most basic
level, your goals for every conversation should align with this mindset:

> Have something to learn, not something to prove.

When you set your sights on smaller, more attainable objectives focused
on learning rather than proving, you're more likely to have productive
conversations that point you in the direction of success.

Back in the friend lunch example, you had no real idea of what you
wanted out of the meeting before you sat down at the table. That is,
aside from your friend confessing that you were 100 percent right and
they were 100 percent wrong. Only after they started groveling would
you, as the merciful friend you are, accept them back into your good
graces. Yeah, that's never going to happen. Entering a difficult
conversation without a plan and simply hoping for a perfect outcome
solely in your favor is a sure way to end up disappointed. Intentionally
approaching a difficult conversation with clear, realistic goals is how
to create real change. Emphasis on *realistic*. Compare these
pie-in-the-sky goals with those that are actually within reach:

- Unrealistic goals:

  - Hoping for an immediate apology and an admission of "You were right"

  - Expecting them to accept your opinion without question

  - Believing one conversation will cure all other underlying
    > relationship problems

  - Assuming the discussion will naturally lead them to seeing
    > everything from your perspective

  - Thinking they will concede and fall on the sword of every point you
    > throw out

- Realistic goals:

  - Ensuring that the other person knows you care about them

  - Gaining a better understanding of where the other person is coming
    > from

  - Agreeing on steps to mitigate or eliminate recurrence of the issue

  - Acknowledging each other's feelings without judgment

  - Leaving the conversation feeling heard, even if agreement isn't
    > reached

See the difference? You'll get blind acceptance of your point of view
zero out of ten times, but you can absolutely get a better understanding
of the other person's point of view nine times out of ten. By setting
realistic goals, you're framing the conversation around expectations you
can meet. To find the goal for your next conservation, try asking
yourself questions like these:

1. If I had to choose, what's the one thing that I'd need them to
   understand?

2. What small step can I take to show them that I heard them?

3. What assumptions am I making?

4. How can I show gratitude for this opportunity to talk?

5. Is there a part of this that I'm trying to win?

Answering these questions will help you formulate goals that will help
you get to where you're going in the conversation. Mind you, you're only
halfway done. A goal is just a destination. You also need a means of
getting there.

#### Why Your Conversations Need Values

Values in conversations serve as your compass, ensuring that your goals
set the direction of what you truly find important, fulfilling, and
meaningful. No matter the terrain of the subject up for discussion, your
values always point you to true north. Rather than putting emphasis on
the other person, your conversational values answer the question, "How
will I show up for myself?" That is, who do you want to be seen as after
the conversation ends? Here's a quick example. Let's say your goal for
the conversation is to leave feeling heard and your value is honesty. At
the end of the talk, the other person asks, "We good?" Typically, you'd
be tempted to quickly say yes just to get it over with. But deep down,
you still don't feel heard. Instead of a flippant agreement, you
respond, "I appreciate what you've shared, and I understand where you're
coming from. I still don't feel like I've been fully heard on my end."
By staying true to your value of honesty, you've ensured that you will
reach your goal while also staying true to yourself. Values project an
image of who you are and what you stand for. In conversations, they also
inform the behaviors that influence how you listen, respond, and engage.
When you align your conversation with your values, you're prepared to
meet your goal before the conversation even starts. Think of times in
your life when you most felt like yourself. It doesn't mean it has to be
your happiest memory. Maybe it was when you were helping someone, or
when you stood up for something. Reflect on what values you expressed.
Was it compassion? Justice? Fairness? Think on the values you find
important in your closest friends. An easy exercise to help you find
your personal values is to poll the person who knows you best, like a
close friend, your partner, or a family member. Ask this person each of
the following questions and write down their response.

1. What do you think I find important in my life based on my daily
   conversations?

2. What are three words you would use to describe my character to
   someone who doesn't know me?

3. What topics of conversation do I get most enthusiastic about?

4. What quality is most important to me in the friendships I have?

5. What emotion do you wish I'd show more of?

There isn't a right or wrong answer, though the responses might surprise
you. The poll is simply to help bring into focus the image you currently
put out into the world. With their feedback, take some time to yourself.
Reflect on topics of your legacy---who you want to be, what you want to
be known for, and what good you want to put out into the world. It might
take a few hours. It might take a few weeks, or even a month or two, to
internalize and identify your personal values. That's okay. It's worth
the time spent. And keep in mind, the values don't have to be a single
word. They can also be phrases or full sentences. Whatever makes sense
to you in your head. In the spirit of fairness, here are mine:

- Where there is room for kindness, I will use it.

- Tell them who I am without saying my name.

- If I can't be a bridge, I'll be a lighthouse.

My personal values highlight the things important to my own personality.
For one, kindness makes me think of my momma, and the way she treats
everyone. And more so, I want to treat others with kindness regardless
of their behavior. I want my actions to speak louder than my words. And
I want to be a steady source of light, a safe place they can come back
to, even when resolution isn't immediately possible. These values help
align me behind every communication that I have. Internal struggles over
what to say or how to behave in times of conflict resolve themselves
when I respond with my values. And that's the point. You don't have to
agonize over what to say or how to say it. You don't have to
second-guess whether the other person deserves their own medicine. Your
values make the tough decisions for you. When you align your
communication with your values, you increase the likelihood of reaching
your goal and ensuring that when times get tough, the real you shows up.
But that means the hard work has to happen before you open your mouth.
Got it? Good. Now let's rewind the tape.

Bzzz.

You look down at your phone to see a text you weren't expecting: "I'm
ready to talk." After arranging tomorrow's lunch meeting with your
friend, you decide on your approach. Instead of passively expecting that
the conversation will magically go in your favor, or that your friend
will suddenly see the light, you spend time thinking about a proactive
approach. You set a goal of gaining a better understanding of each
other's perspectives. You choose gratitude as your guiding value, a
feeling of thankfulness for this friend and the memories you've shared.
And now you're ready for a redo. As the two of you sit down, you say,
"Thank you for meeting with me." "Yeah, of course. I wanted to," your
friend replies. You lead the conversation. "I could've done better."
Your friend replies, "Me too." A little more at ease, and with your goal
and values still in mind, you take a breath and continue. "Help me
better understand what you were trying to tell me. What did I miss?" And
for twenty minutes, your friend pours out their insecurities over things
you had no idea about. Things that, had you taken the opportunity to
learn, wouldn't have led you both to where you are now. You don't
interrupt. You don't rebut or justify. You only listen. Having felt
heard and acknowledged, your friend relaxes. "Can I share what I saw
from my perspective?" you ask. "Yes, I think that would help me," your
friend says. Soon, it's all water under the bridge as you two continue
to share your feelings and perspectives.

When it's time for you to walk into your own next conversation, don't
just rely on how it went in your head. Be realistic. Be intentional.
These questions will help:

1. What is my goal for this conversation?

2. Which of my values do I need to meet that goal?

By keeping conversational goals and values in mind, you put connection
within reach. Who will your next conversation be with? What conversation
needs to happen but hasn't yet? Rather than trying to solve all your
problems in one fell swoop, focus on one smaller, more manageable
conversation. Then later, have another. And another, until connection is
made. Take advantage of the power of your next conversation. The
foundation of every strong relationship is built on this mindset, where
the aim isn't to win but to connect, share, and grow together, day after
day, year after year. Let your next conversation be an opportunity to
practice this clarity in goals and values.

#### CHAPTER SUMMARY

- Your first step toward connection is as easy as your next
  conversation.

- Believing that a difficult conversation will go exactly as you heard
  it playing out in your mind is setting yourself up for
  disappointment. Stop putting too much pressure on a single
  conversation.

- Lower your expectations and build on the mindset of having something
  to learn, not something to prove.

- Set realistic targets for the conversation aimed at gaining
  understanding instead of grabbing for quick (and unrealistic) wins.

- Support the goal with your values, the rules you'll follow to make
  sure you show up as your authentic self.

### Chapter 3: The Truth About Connection

A while back, my momma randomly texted me. She asked me about the
family's white Nissan, the car I'd driven during law school that had
been passed down through my siblings. It sat in the driveway of my
parents' house. I hadn't driven it in years. This is the verbatim text
exchange:

> MOM: Do you know how many miles are on the white Nissan?
>
> ME: No ma'am.
>
> MOM: You don't have any idea what the mileage is?
>
> ME: No ma'am.
>
> MOM: Ok, I thought you'd know how many miles were on the white Nissan.
>
> ME: Momma, I don't know how else to tell you. I don't know the mileage
> on the white Nissan.
>
> MOM: That's fine, Jefferson. I just don't like your attitude.

Honestly, it made me laugh. And thankfully, she wasn't standing in front
of me. I called her almost immediately to do what the texts could
not---convey my lighthearted tone, provide assurance of my sincerity,
and offer a heartfelt apology. Have you ever had a text conversation
suddenly start to turn into an argument when you weren't even upset? Or
have you ever misread or misconstrued someone's tone or feelings toward
you based on an email or online message? Why is it that despite all this
technology to make communication easier, it seems harder than ever? The
answer is that you're not connecting at a level that conveys emotional
nuance. You're simply transmitting pixels arranged to display as words
and expecting the same result. You're living in a world of transmission,
not connection. True connection involves sharing information with depth.
It gives way for delivery and context. It touches your deepest needs for
belonging, understanding, and expression. Transmission, such as text,
email, and the like, focuses on sending and receiving signals through a
cold medium. It's transactional. It cares only about processing and
conveying data. Transmission is efficient, to be sure, but indifferent
to understanding and authenticity. You see the problems presented by
transmission every day. It's the reason people write things in the
comment section of social media apps that they'd never say to someone's
face. It's why texts and emails can easily be misinterpreted. It's why
people feel protected behind a keyboard. With transmission, the human
connection isn't there. Did my mom hear my texts as words in her head?
Oh, she read them all right. But she needed my voice to hear my true
meaning. Please don't misunderstand me. There is absolutely a place and
a purpose for remote interaction in today's digital landscape. Where you
go wrong, however, is when you believe transmission is a replacement for
connection. It's not. That's like thinking reading sheet music is going
to give you the same feeling as hearing a symphony perform it, or that a
description of a sunset will feel the same as seeing it with your own
eyes. Transmission conveys information, but connection breathes life
into it. You're meant to feel the warmth of a smile, not read it in an
emoji.

#### What Is Connection?

Here's where I recognize that the word connection can be a bit oversold,
sort of like telling someone to "be mindful." It sounds good and all,
but what does it truly mean? At a base level, connection is a dressed-up
word for understanding and acknowledgment. Think of it as a two-factor
authentication. You can't have one without the other to connect. If I
understand you but you can't tell, you won't connect with me. And if I
acknowledge what you're saying but I still don't understand it, I won't
connect with you. You need both the internal process of understanding
and the external process of acknowledgment to make connection.

To me, connection is where you decide to roll up your sleeves and
approach the conversation for what it is instead of what you want it to
be. I can understand and acknowledge you without agreeing with what you
said. I can understand and acknowledge you and still be upset with you,
hurt by you, or sad. I can remember as a teenager being upset about
something feeling unfair and voicing my disagreement. My dad would
always say, "You don't have to like it. You just need to understand it."
Back then, as you'd imagine, I didn't appreciate that very much. But as
I grew older, I started to see the wisdom in what he was saying. He was
allowing me the space to disagree. He was making sure that he connected
with me so I understood why. People hear "connection" as it relates to
conflict and often associate the word with turning negatives into
positives, where it's all about happy things and feel-good Hallmark
movie moments. That's not the world you or I live in. Connection is both
positive and negative. It's a conduit for the happy and the sad, the
easy as much as the difficult. It's both. You can't choose the outcome
of a conversation. You can only choose whether to try to connect. And
here's another truth: Sometimes not connecting is the right choice.
Sometimes disconnection is the answer. Not every conversation needs
connection. Maybe you've heard about connection in terms of trying to
meet someone "on their level" or "where they are." I disagree that it's
a hard-and-fast rule. There are some interactions in which you shouldn't
be meeting them anywhere near their level. There are some conversations
in which you shouldn't be within a thousand miles of where they are.
Some people don't want to be reached. That doesn't make you a failure.
That often makes you wise. So much of what's written about communication
nowadays gets caught up in the idea that you're supposed to create easy
conversations, in which everyone leaves happy and comfortable. Honest
communication has nothing to do with what's happy or comfortable.
Connection sometimes means having conversations that are going to be
uncomfortable. What you need is the control and the confidence to have
them anyway.

#### Three Ways You Cut Off Connection

In theory, communication should be simple. I say something, you
understand it, you say something back, and I understand it. Piece of
cake, right? Pfft. Everyday communication is littered with problems:
misinterpretation, interruption, defensive behavior, and overreaction.
Some people aren't aware of these problems that impact their lives.
Others simply lack the skill or practice to get past them without
causing more problems. When your communication falls flat, it's usually
because one or more of three common things cut the connection.

##### Cut 1: Lack of awareness

During a heated discussion, have you ever heard someone snark, "Do you
even hear yourself right now?" The truthful answer is no, you don't. No,
I mean really. You don't. The sound we hear in our head when we speak
actually comes from vibrations through our bones. The vocal cords travel
up through your skull into your inner ear and make your voice sound
deeper and richer. The sound you hear when you listen to a recording
comes from sound waves through the air, which make your voice sound
thinner or "off" compared to what you'd expect. That's why if you've
ever watched a video or listened to a recording of yourself, you may
think, "Wait, is that my voice? Is that how I sound?" That's because
it's not. Not to you, anyway. It should be no surprise, then, that
you're woefully unaware of what others see, hear, or experience when you
talk. Unaware of your volume, your tics, or your verbal fillers. Ever
had someone tell you they didn't like your tone when you thought it was
perfectly fine? Or tell you that you're yelling when you didn't feel
like you were? All too often, when you're in conversation with another
person, your sense of situational awareness puts you in a position of
conflict. This lack of awareness can inject tension into your
relationships---almost always unintentionally. Imagine that after a
stressful phone call in your office, you unknowingly scrunched your
eyebrows and looked upset when a coworker gave a simple hello as you two
passed each other in the hall. That coworker might now avoid you, or
worse, speak negatively about you to other people, all because you were
unaware of your own signals. You've heard it before: "I thought you were
mad at me." The most difficult awareness to achieve is self-awareness.
So tell me. Where is the tension in your shoulders right now coming
from? Are you taking full breaths? Why is your jaw clenched? Without
self-awareness, you stumble around in the dark, unaware of the toes you
step on when you speak and fumbling for the keys to your own well-being.
Awareness allows you to identify how you're feeling in the present
moment and to understand why you're feeling a certain way. It allows you
to take an emotional self-inventory and to act on your findings. When
honed, awareness turns into alignment, a continuous feedback loop that
tells you whether your current condition is aligned for the current
moment. That alignment gives you control.

##### Cut 2: Lack of understanding

Trouble comes when you insist on viewing the world through the lens of
your own telescope. Try as you may, the harder you push to make them see
things your way, the more stubbornly they seem to resist. In a classic
disagreement, it is almost always the other person who you expect to
bend their way of thinking---not yourself. When neither person makes the
effort to understand the other, it leads to hurtful comments like these:

- "I can't believe you're voting for that person. How could you be so
  stupid?"

- "You just don't understand!"

- "I thought I knew you. It's like we're speaking different languages."

It's often not the difference in belief or opinion that's the problem.
It's the failure to understand the difference in *perspective*. When you
bother yourself enough to want to know why someone holds a particular
belief, rather than simply criticizing the belief because it's different
from yours, only then will you begin to appreciate their point of view.
In communication, understanding is thankfully a skill that can be
learned. It's also an essential skill. Without the ability to appreciate
the other's perspective during conflict, it's like a screen door on a
submarine---you're not going to get far. When you possess this ability,
however, you're empowered to create deep relationships with lasting
success. You reach this understanding not by transmission, but through
true connection.

##### Cut 3: Lack of self-assurance

Being direct can be difficult for many people. There's a fear or
discomfort that comes with conflict. This fear typically shows up in the
form of physically turning your body away, avoiding eye contact, or
crossing your arms. There's also the inclination to look away with your
words, using phrases that soften or obscure your true feelings. These
passive phrases make you approach the conversation more indirectly; for
example:

- "Hi, sorry to bother you. So, I was thinking, and you can totally tell
  me if it's not going to work, but..."

- "...and that's why I feel like it could work. Does that make sense?"

- "This is probably a dumb question, but..."

The lack of self-assurance not only tanks your self-esteem but also
stifles your personal growth. When even your own thoughts are treated
like an inconvenience, you'll find yourself beginning to hide from the
very interactions that could bring out the best in you. It also prevents
you from asserting yourself to go where you want to go---to chase that
dream, to follow that career, to find that love. Honesty in
communication requires confidence---a connection and confidence that
asserts your needs and ensures that your voice is heard, your boundaries
are respected, and your number one advocate is yourself.

#### A Quick Note on Confidence

We're going to go in-depth on confidence in chapter seven. But before
you keep reading, there's something that I need you to know now. When
you see the word confidence in these pages, I want you to hold on to a
distinction in the back of your mind. The concept of confidence you're
likely more familiar with from your past prioritizes perfection. The
version of confidence I'm asking you to adopt moving forward prioritizes
grace. Confidence doesn't mean you're not afraid. It means you do it
scared. Confidence doesn't mean you're always right. It means you tell
them when you're wrong. Confidence doesn't mean you avoid mistakes. It
means you embrace them. Every day I run into just how much of a
misconception exists about what confidence is. I receive message after
message beginning with "*I wish*." I wish I could say this, I wish I
could say that. People often talk of confidence as if it's a trait
you're born with, like how tall you are or how much you resemble a
parent. They see it as a standard of perfection. In truth, it's far from
it. You'll see. The point I'm making now is that if you read the word
*confidence* and struggle to identify with it, or find it challenging to
conceptualize, you're holding the right book.

#### CHAPTER SUMMARY

- How you approach your next conversation can be the difference between
  building connection and breaking it. Misinterpretations in texts,
  messages, and emails highlight the gap between transmission and
  connection.

- Connection isn't about agreeing on everything or even positive
  outcomes. It's a two-part process of understanding and acknowledging
  each other's viewpoints, even when they differ.

- Lack of awareness, understanding, and self-assurance cut off
  connection to the other person. Part two of this book will show you
  how to overcome these issues by applying easy, practical methods
  that build the connection for you.

## Part II: The Application

For those who follow my social media content, you know that I'm not a
fan of the fluff. I don't give advice that tells you how to communicate
from the sidelines, like you need to "actively listen" or "show empathy"
or "keep an open mind." I'd rather leave that kind of instruction to the
armchair philosophers---it means well, but it doesn't work well. And
what is it really asking you to do, anyway? You need something concrete.
Something you can use right away. That's what you'll get in the
following pages. I've created a function that helps build connection in
your next conversation for you. It works for my own legal clients, and
it will work for you too. The function is simple. And to no one's
surprise, it has three steps:

1. Say it with control.
2. Say it with confidence.
3. Say it to connect.

What's "it," exactly? Your view. Your needs. Your truth. It turns these
essentials of self-expression that make you the unique, one-of-a-kind
person that you are into components that naturally pull out your
assertive voice. It may even be a voice you haven't heard before, or one
you feel as though you once knew. And that's a really awesome thing.
These three inputs follow a cognitive approach to problem-solving called
functional thinking. If it sounds familiar, that's because you've likely
seen it before, a long, long time ago in math class. Remember algebra?
Yeah, me neither. But if you've ever had to "solve for x," then you've
engaged in functional thinking. In a nutshell, functional thinking is
about observing patterns in how inputs affect an output. Stay with me
here. Even if you fell asleep in math class, you understand functions.
You use them every day. When you put coffee grounds into a coffee maker,
you can expect it'll make you coffee. When you press the down button on
a thermostat, you can expect the temperature to lower. Your
grandmother's family cake recipe? It's a function. The recipe, framed in
a set of instructions, turns ingredients (inputs) into a finished cake
(output). You don't sit there asking yourself why an egg is being an egg
that day---you just know that if you follow the recipe, or the function,
you can predict that you'll get your grandmother's cake. Now, I can't
promise you cake. But I can promise you that if you follow the inputs of
the function, the output will be a bolder, more assertive you. Simply by
using a recipe aimed at better communication, you can expect results
that put the control over the next conversation back into your hands.

## Rule 1: Say It with Control

### Chapter 4: Control Yourself

This isn't based on a true story. But it could be. Lilly is three. For
the past two weeks, she's been fighting bedtime. Either she wants to
stay up long after she should be asleep or she gets out of bed multiple
times before finally, thankfully, falling asleep. John is thirty-three
and Lilly's dad. John believes in a flexible nightly routine. If Lilly
isn't ready for sleep, he thinks it's totally fine if she plays quietly
in her room for thirty minutes until she gets sleepy. He likes the idea
of Lilly's independence and listening to her own signals when her body
is tired. For the past two weeks, John's been biting his tongue. You
see, Grace---John's wife and Lilly's mom---believes in strict routines.
Lilly's bedtime is eight p.m. No exceptions. Grace feels that
consistency and structure are the keys to their daughter getting a
restful night of sleep and behaving well the next day. For the past two
weeks, Grace has been bottling her anger. Now it's eight p.m., Lilly's
bedtime, and the nightly show begins. Precious Lilly, blissfully unaware
of the time, is playing with her toys in her room. She looks like she
just downed two shots of espresso. Everyone knows she's not going to
sleep anytime soon. So when Grace gives her that *look*, Lilly preempts
her. Eyes wide in that coercive way seemingly built into every child,
Lilly whines, "But I'm not tired yet." John knows this routine is taking
a negative toll on all of them, but he also can't help himself. After
Grace goes down the hall, he tells Lilly, "OK, you can play just a
little bit longer. But after that it's time to go night-night." John
walks to the living room, hoping Grace hasn't heard him. As soon as he
enters, Grace says (a little too loudly), "What did I tell you about
that? The answer is no. It's bedtime. She's exhausted." She pauses, then
hollers back down the hall, "No, Lilly, it's time to put the toys away,
honey! It's bedtime." John replies (a little too loudly), "She's not a
robot, Grace. A few minutes won't hurt anything. It's not her fault that
you have a control problem."

#### The Two Phases of Every Argument

Oof. Let's leave Grace, John, and Lilly for a moment. I have to imagine
that you've felt this, even if you aren't a parent. We've all been John
or Grace in similar situations. We've been short with someone. We've
said something we almost immediately regret. We win the immediate
conversational battle only to lose the relational war in a race to the
bottom. It doesn't have to be that way. You can learn how to handle
yourself---your words, your emotions, and your body, all of which factor
into your conversations---so that heated discussions don't explode. But
you have to first understand a few facts about communication and how
your body works.

> Inside every argument, there's an ignition phase and a cooling phase.

Ignition happens when, with enough friction, the productive becomes
destructive. Something about the interaction begins to rub you the wrong
way. You resented a word. You didn't appreciate the other person's tone.
You didn't like their look. With limited time and enough friction, heat
builds. And before you know it, you're on fire. Ignition happens the
moment you:

- Light a match (feel threatened)
- Blow a fuse (get defensive)
- Go nuclear (personal attacks)

When you reach these ignition or heating phases in a conversation,
there's a tendency to somewhat forget who you are. Psychologists may
refer to this as being "flooded." It's as if you've blacked out the
experience entirely. You say things you'd never typically say. You find
it difficult to locate your thoughts or decide what you want to say,
like a fog over your brain. So you blurt out words, caring little about
how they sound, what they'll do, or what they even mean. Cooling occurs
when the heat begins to dissipate. It happens the moment when:

- You turn off the heat (walk away)
- You put out the fire (mutual understanding)
- There's nothing left to burn (impasse)

Whichever route you take, the temperature stops rising and starts to
come down. The smoke clears and the frustration lifts. Clarity enters
the chat. You regain awareness of the importance of the relationship and
why (or if) the other person matters to you. You know you're cooling
when voices lower and tones sound softer. Words are more selectively
chosen. Between "I'm sorry I said that" and "I didn't mean it that way,"
you may exchange apologies or try to clarify meanings. While ignition
tends to sound more closed, cooling sounds more open. You may begin to
cry. You may begin to regret.

All you know is, you just don't feel great about it. The hotter the
argument burned, the longer it will take to cool down, like turning off
the stove and waiting for your cast iron skillet to become cool to the
touch. It becomes a matter of degree. Unfortunately, John and Grace are
still far from cooling down. Grace unleashes two weeks of resentment.
"This! This is why she never listens! Because you always bend the rules!
One of us here actually cares about her well-being. I'm the one having
to deal with her when she's cranky while you get to go do whatever you
want! You're never here. What would you know?" If we could pause this
exact moment and scan Grace's body, here's what we'd see: Her amygdala,
the part of the brain that processes emotions, is yelling at her nervous
system that a threat is near: she's being undermined. Her body has
released the hormone epinephrine, or adrenaline, putting her into
fight-or-flight mode. She feels it as a prickling sensation and it
bristles her tone. Her pupils have dilated, allowing more light to enter
her eyes so she can focus. Her breathing has quickened and shallowed,
increasing her oxygen levels. Her heart rate is elevated, pumping blood
to her body and away from less essential areas, preparing her muscles
for action. Her shoulders, neck, and jaw go tense. And most of all, her
prefrontal cortex functions are suppressed. That's the area of the brain
used for higher-order thinking like rational thought, decision-making,
and emotional regulation. With her emotions now taking full control, she
throws all caution to the wind. The fight-or-flight response is meant to
help us flee or fend off a bear in the wild, not to conduct a discussion
about parenting. In this moment, Grace's fight-or-flight mode is
unanimously in favor of fight. To make matters worse, John's body is
experiencing the same heating effects. He yells, "Me?! Oh, what, so now
you're saying you're the only one who cares about her?" He's in for the
fight too, and while losing control, he lights a devastating fuse he
hopes will win the battle. "What do you want, for her to end up like
your crazy mother? Or worse, like you---lonely and without any real
friends?" Visibly stung, Grace doubles down and goes in for another
round. They've both dug in. They continue to fight. Their bodies want to
eliminate the threat that the other person represents. As the argument
continues, neither Grace nor John truly realizes what they're
saying---because the real Grace and John aren't communicating. Their
bodies and minds are reacting. Igniting. Doing and saying whatever they
can to make the threat go away. More often than not, ignition phases
have to burn themselves out until, both opponents exhausted, there's a
noticeable pause. A brief moment long enough for them to see the damage
done. That's when John sees the pain in Grace's eyes. He's crossed the
line. The cooling phase has descended. If we could pause this exact
moment and scan John's body, here's what we'd see: He feels drained,
both physically and emotionally. His nerves die down. His focus widens.
His heart rate and breathing slow down. His prefrontal cortex injects
his mind with objective analysis. Reflection gives way to regret. All
John can think is, *Why did I say that? How did I let it get this far?*

Near tears, Grace wonders the same thing. *Why did I blow up like that?
Why did I have to say those things? What's wrong with me?*

And just like that, what they started talking about in the first place
is forgotten---and Lilly is now fast asleep on her bedroom floor.

#### How Your Body Controls Your Response

When the heat rises in a conversation, your physiology responds first.
Your internal wiring, known as your autonomic nervous system, includes
your brain, spinal cord, and all the connections between them and the
rest of your body. This nervous system gives you the ability to
perceive, sense, feel, emote, behave, and think. It operates below the
surface of your consciousness, where involuntary actions are
controlled---like how your eyes are moving word-to-word across this page
without you having to tell them to, or your mind sounding out each word
in your head, all while you're still breathing with a beating heart and
hearing the noises around you. To better control yourself during
conflict, you have to know what's happening inside you. The more
technical terms for the ignition phase and cooling phase derive from the
two modes of your autonomic nervous system. You are always responding to
situations in one of these modes:

- Fight-or-flight: This mode is controlled by your sympathetic
  nervous system. Fight wants to attack: throw a punch, say a hurtful
  word, stand your ground. Flight wants to escape: leave the room,
  hang up the phone, ignore the text.

- Rest-and-digest: This mode is controlled by your parasympathetic
  nervous system. Rest wants to recover: step back, pause, take a
  breather. Digest wants to recharge: store energy, refuel, balance
  the mood.

As you'd guess, fight-or-flight is your ignition phase. Rest-and-digest
is the cooling phase. Normally, when it comes to personal activities or
things you do alone, like typing an email or eating a quiet lunch, you
don't notice these processes in action. They operate instinctually. But
add another person into the mix, where communication is necessary, and
the internal signs become much more recognizable, especially in moments
of conflict. So what does this mean for you? More than you realize, the
mere presence of conflicting opinions or arguments can activate your
fight-or-flight mode. To protect you, your body orchestrates hundreds of
unseen changes in seconds that result in a biological response geared
 toward emotion-driven, rather than logic-driven, behavior. And through
that suppression of coherent thinking, your emotions manifest themselves
in familiar ways: a defensive comment, a snide comeback, an angry shout,
a slammed door, a loud sigh, tears of frustration. When you get nervous
before an important phone call, hear bad news, or even receive
unexpected praise, your brain and body are making micro up-and-down
adjustments. These fluctuations in your emotional state are direct
responses from your nervous system, which is constantly reacting to
perceived or actual threats around you. A rapid heartbeat, shaky hands,
flushed cheeks---these are all manifestations of your body's way of
processing information and determining how best to make these
adjustments within milliseconds. Equipped with this knowledge, you can
look at conversations in a different light. Rather than immediately
blaming the other person, you can see your internal response as a
natural reaction that requires further digging and curiosity. Friction
offers room for improvement. Because what triggers you teaches you.

#### Meet Your Triggers

"We need to talk." When you read or hear that message, what's your first
thought? Let's be honest. Nobody likes that message, whether it's in an
email, in a text, or face-to-face. Why? It leaves you in the unknown.
Your brain tells you there's the potential threat that something is not
right, which triggers your ignition mode. The fact that you prepare for
the worst is downright biological. When you experience something you
don't like, whether it's heard, seen, or felt, your body can perceive
that stimulus as a threat---a trigger. By "trigger" I mean something
that causes a strong, negative reaction in you. These triggers can take
many forms and are heavily influenced by your personality and childhood,
so don't get caught up in thinking your trigger is wrong or inaccurate
because it may be different from someone else's. Broadly speaking,
triggers can be categorized as either physical or psychological.

##### 1. Physical triggers {#physical-triggers}

Physical triggers are the most noticeable triggers that hinder
communication. They're the easiest to recognize because they involve
immediate physical harm, like seeing someone rear back to punch you or
an aggressive animal coming toward you. Physical triggers can range from
reactions to your environment, such as feeling nervous while hiking
close to a cliff edge, to your body's signals, like feeling sick,
dehydrated, or exhausted. Similarly, when you're communicating with
others, your body instinctively detects potential dangers to your
physical well-being, which can trigger immediate defensive responses.
Imagine how the following examples may make you feel physically
threatened:

- One of your parents raises their voice or uses a sharp tone while
  > demanding that you obey.

- Your boss steps too close into your personal space during a
  > discussion.

- A coworker angrily points a finger at you during a company meeting.

- Someone unexpectedly grabs your arm to get your attention.

Physical triggers, whether direct or perceived, impact your sense of
security and well-being. These triggers provoke protective instincts
that override your more logical thinking.

##### 2. Psychological triggers {#psychological-triggers}

Psychological triggers are the more frequent type of trigger that hurts
our communication. These triggers don't involve direct or expected
physical harm. They're simply thoughts, either perceived in the present
or anticipated in the future. They arrive in three ways: social
evaluation, personal identity, and loss.

###### Social evaluation triggers

Social evaluation triggers involve the fear of negative judgment,
rejection, or humiliation. These perceptual triggers are the questions
you ask yourself every day when faced with social interactions:

- If I say this...

  - Will they think I'm smart?

  - Will they get offended?

  - Will they want to be with me more?

- If I do this...

  - Will it be seen as arrogant?

  - Will I be criticized?

  - Will they pay more attention to me?

- If I look like this...

  - Will I fit in?

  - Will they make fun of me?

  - Will they think I'm successful?

Social evaluation triggers can be boiled down to the idea that you care
about what others think about you. We all have a deeply rooted need to
be liked and desired. You've felt this trigger if you've had to decline
an invitation or deliver bad news, or if you've ever experienced FOMO,
the fear of missing out. They're all an evaluation of your social
contribution: a judgment of how others evaluate your reputation. The
recurring theme in social evaluation scenarios is vulnerability.

###### Personal identity threats

Whereas social evaluation is concerned with how others perceive you,
personal identity is about how you perceive yourself. You recognize
these threats as challenges to your competence, autonomy, purpose, or
values. They call into question who you believe you are and what you
stand for:

1. Competence triggers: If I fail, does it mean I'm not capable? If
   they correct me, am I no longer seen as enough? *Example: a
   professional reenters the workforce late in life only to be met
   with skeptical remarks from a manager about their ability to keep
   up the pace, causing them to doubt themself.*

2. Autonomy triggers: Am I being micromanaged because I'm not
   trusted? Do I have any say in decisions that affect me? *Example:
   a seasoned nurse or schoolteacher suddenly finds themself
   micromanaged by a barrage of directives from new administrations,
   chipping away at their sense of autonomy.*

3. Purpose triggers: Does my work even matter? Is it making a
   difference? Am I just going through the motions without any real
   direction or goal? *Example: a once-passionate Wall Street
   executive is grappling with a sense of meaning behind their work,
   no longer comfortable with the crass talk around the office after
   having a child--- their professional identity is now at odds with
   their new role as a parent.*

4. Value triggers: Are my beliefs being challenged or disrespected?
   Am I being pushed to compromise on who I am? *Example: a new hire
   feels his values are under attack when he overhears one of the
   male senior leaders make a sexually explicit comment about a
   female intern, creating dissonance between his personal
   convictions and his workplace.*

Each of these scenarios highlights the fact that threats to our personal
identity force us to question who we want to be. You can also feel a
challenge to your identity by extension or association. Let's say you
hear someone criticize your favorite political candidate. You also feel
challenged, even though the criticism is not aimed at you, because
you've tied your identity to that candidate or party. Similarly, you can
talk bad about your momma if you'd like, but if I talked bad about her,
you'd have every right to pop me in the mouth. Why? Because she's helped
define your very identity. Even just hearing the word *no* can be
perceived as a personal identity threat. When someone tells you no,
doubts you, or says you can't do something, how do you feel? You want to
do it even more. You also feel the same way when someone sharply asks
you *why*. Your brain immediately wants to reply, "Because I said so,
that's why!" Someone else questioning your choices or actions can be
threatening because it calls into question your sense of autonomy. The
recurring theme in personal identity threats is adequacy.

###### Loss triggers

Loss is the fear of losing someone or something you value, whether it's
a person, a job, or a certain status. In communication, you often
encounter loss as the fear of losing a relationship or status. Say
you're presenting a proposal at work and a boss raises doubts. Do you
push back, defending yourself as the more knowledgeable one? Or do you
concede your boss's point and open the floor to further criticism? The
immediate fear triggered here is rejection of your proposal, but the
underlying fear is the possible loss of your job. The psychological
threat of loss can make you defensive or overcautious in your
communication. Perhaps it causes you to overexplain, hesitate to voice
your opinions, or avoid difficult conversations altogether. You may
often feel this way because the anticipated pain of the loss is stronger
than the temporary discomfort of immediate confrontation. The recurring
theme in loss is separation. Learning about these triggers, you've
probably been able to see how they can show themselves in your own life.
If you still struggle with knowing what your specific triggers are, just
ask a friend. It can be as easy as, "What do you think my triggers are?"
If they're a good friend, and if you have a good sense of humor, they'll
likely have no problem telling you the truth. So you've met your
triggers. But how do you use this knowledge to improve your
communication?

Recognizing your body's ups and downs in the face of conflict gives you
a huge advantage. Not only do you better understand your own reactions
and triggers, but you'll also begin to identify the signs in the other
person. You could call it emotional intelligence. I prefer to call it
discernment, a sixth sense--like ability to pick up on the smaller
details. A raising of the voice. An exhale of exasperation. A tensing of
the shoulders. They aren't behaviors to get offended over. They're
information to *gather*. Data about the emotional state of the person.
Instead of getting upset when they raise their voice, you relate to it
in your own life as a sign of their body's *ignition*---it informs you
that their body is feeling threatened, either by you or by something
hidden from you. Instead of reacting to "win" the argument, which you
know now will only trigger more ignition, you respond in a way that
triggers cooling. It helps you better gauge the temperature of the
conversation. By understanding yourself, you understand the other
person. When you reverse engineer your own triggers, you'll become more
skilled at identifying the triggers of others. You'll begin to hear
someone's raised voice not as an attack but as a plea to remove the
threat. If you want to put out their fire, find their trigger.

#### CHAPTER SUMMARY

- What triggers you teaches you---if you're willing to learn.

- Inside every argument is an ignition phase and a cooling phase. The
  > ignition phase engages the signs of fight-or-flight, like saying
  > something to hurt someone or abruptly leaving the room. The cooling
  > phase begins when the temperature of the conflict lowers, like
  > reaching understanding or adding distance between you and the other
  > person.

- There are two main triggers to know: physical and psychological. These
  > triggers arrive through actual or perceived threats to your body
  > that activate ignition.

- Understanding what triggers are unique to you informs you which areas
  > to work on and which areas to avoid. When you reverse engineer your
  > own triggers, you'll become more skilled at identifying the triggers
  > of others. You'll begin to hear someone's raised voice not as an
  > attack but as a plea to remove the threat. If you want to put out
  > their fire, find their trigger.

### Chapter 5: Control the Moment

Here on the east side of Texas, we have tall pine trees. The woods are
so thick with brush that you can't see more than a few yards in front of
you. Growing up, my friends and I would make trails, build shelters, and
play in creeks, pretending we were in some sort of survival adventure. I
have a lot of fond memories in the woods. One of my favorite things
about living around tall trees is when it rains. You can't see the storm
rolling in like you can in places where it's flat and open. If you just
rely on your eyes, you won't know it's coming until it's already on top
of you. You know it's about to rain because you sense it. Everything
slows down. The woods and the animals go quiet. The temperature drops,
and the sound of rustling leaves draws closer as a slight wind moves
through the trees. You can feel the coolness on your skin. The air
electrifies. You smell the rain. It's in this moment, this calm before
the storm, when the earth hangs in a suspended second of stillness.
There's a building anticipation you can almost touch, as if nature is
waiting for just the right time to unleash the storm. Every argument
contains the same charged silence. Right before the conflict begins,
there's a noticeable change in the emotional climate. Maybe a pause
lingers too long, or the tone subtly shifts. A word choice seems out of
place. You know it's about to be a conflict because you sense it. You
can feel yourself, or the other person, about to give way. Like the
instant right before a roller coaster takes its first dive. This is
where you're losing out on one of the most crucial moments of control in
an argument, and here's why. You're looking for what will control
*them*---not what's controlling *you*. You're too busy planning out your
opening line. Too occupied preparing to scold or reprimand them. You
miss out on the ability to steer the argument because you view the
coming storm as only a call to arms, when in reality, this very moment
can give you the high ground in every argument. People miss out on this
subtle moment because they're not looking for it. That gives you an
invisible advantage before an argument ever begins. You'll never have a
better chance for control than when it's quiet, right before the storm
hits. So don't waste that chance preparing for them---spend it preparing
for you. In the previous chapter, I told you how your body works in
heated arguments. Your next step is to equip yourself with tools that
leverage what your body already does. Each of these tools requires only
a moment to use but offers long-lasting benefits. And the more often you
use these tactics, the more leverage you'll have. To stay in control
even in the most chaotic conversations, these are the three most
effective tools I've developed:

- Your first word is your breath.
- Your first thought is a quick scan.
- Your first conversation is a small talk.

Like with rain, you often can't stop an argument from coming. But by
using these three quick but effective tactics, you'll do more than just
weather it. You'll begin to prevent arguments from igniting and control
outcomes altogether.

#### Your First Word Is Your Breath

Not long ago, I presented Elizabeth for her deposition in her personal
injury case. The attorney on the other side was notorious for trying to
get under people's skin, mine included. Given my run-ins with him in the
past, I knew his strategy: hurt Elizabeth's credibility. If he could get
her to trip over her words or say something wrong, or if he could force
out an emotionally negative outburst, she'd become easier to
control---and as a result, he'd have greater influence over the outcome
of the case. Knowing this, I spent hours with Elizabeth preparing for
the deposition. To help train her, I changed my tone to mimic the other
attorney's. I quickly asked questions, trying to steamroll her for an
even faster response. In a gruff, rushed voice, I asked, "So you had
time to see the other car, didn't you?" Elizabeth gave me a blank stare.
Pretending to be frustrated, I said, "Come on, Mrs. Carson." Then I
raised my voice. "It's an easy question. Yes or no. You had the time?"
My pressing caused her to freeze---another symptom of the ignition
phase---which resulted in a deer-in-the-headlights situation. She was
nervous; her voice shook and her eyes watered, both of which are totally
natural bodily reactions. After explaining to her why and how her body
was reacting to this aggressive behavior, I introduced a concept that
would become her most-used tool. Your first word is your breath. I
explained it this way: Whenever you're about to begin a sentence, let
your breath be the first word that you say. That is, where your first
word might be, put a breath in its place. Forcing yourself to imagine
your breath as a word, as part of the conversation itself, helps you
engage the protocols of controlled breathing. These protocols play a
critical role in regulating both your body and your emotions. Putting
your breath first places you in control from the outset. The first two
seconds are the most crucial because they prevent the momentum of your
ignition phase from building. Terms like breathwork and breath control
and controlled breathing are all fancy words for putting intention into
how you breathe. For example, you've probably breathed just fine reading
up to this point. You've given little attention to how much air is
moving in and out of your lungs. But if I tell you to breathe in and
hold it for five seconds and then release, well, congratulations! You've
engaged in breath control, the act of placing attention on the air
moving through your body. Now, take a deep breath in with me and think
about your last stressful conversation. Do you recall what your
breathing was like? In arguments, your breath typically does one of two
things: it speeds up or it locks up. Neither is good. When your breath
speeds up, that's a sign that you've triggered your ignition phase. You
have to breathe more to meet the increased oxygen needs of your muscles,
which prepare you to run or attack. The faster you breathe, the faster
your heart needs to pump blood to keep you oxygenated and alive,
increasing your heart rate. When you have rapid breathing, your
mechanical abilities to think and speak suffer. When your breath locks
up, you'll feel like you're suffocating or drowning. In some sense, you
are. Whereas rapid breathing leads to too much oxygen in your body,
little to no breathing leads to too much carbon dioxide because of your
failure to exhale. So holding your breath, or shallow breathing, is
equally detrimental. As the tension increases, your cognitive ability
decreases. To avoid these problems, your breath needs balance. Okay,
back to Elizabeth. On the day of the deposition, she started out great.
Elizabeth's words were slow and shake-free. But after a while, I could
tell that she was beginning to lose confidence. Her voice began to
tremble, her responses came out faster, and she was visibly getting
annoyed. She was getting defensive. She was losing control. But that's
when the magic happened. Right before I was going to jump in and ask for
a five-minute break, she did it. Leaning his head forward, the other
attorney pressed her. "Fair to say you weren't paying attention at all
that day, were you? Isn't that right?" Elizabeth took a breath, lowered
her shoulders, and took a half second for herself before calmly stating,
"No." Right then, I knew what the opposing attorney didn't: her first
word had come before the no. It was her breath. And by using the space
between his question and her answer to steady herself, she had just
taken back control of the conversation. "What's wrong? Did you not like
my question?" the opposing attorney jabbed. A composed and confident
Elizabeth smiled and shook her head. "Oh, no, I like your questions just
fine," she said slowly. Hearing this, he tilted his head in confusion.
"I appreciate you helping me clarify it," she continued. "Again, the
answer is no. That's not fair to say." Open-mouthed and deflated, the
opposing attorney fumbled over his words while trying to find his next
question. Seeing that Elizabeth wasn't going to give him the reactions
he wanted, he asked a few softball questions and quickly finished. I was
beaming at her. She couldn't control his questions, so she decided to
control herself.

#### How to Take a Conversational Breath

When your first word is your breath, I call it a *conversational
breath*. I use the word conversational because you can do this in the
natural flow of a conversation. When done right, it looks just like
normal breathing. You can use this technique at any time without looking
odd to the other person. But the best time to take a conversational
breath is either while the other person is talking and you're listening
or shortly before you respond. Here's how to take a conversational
breath:

1. Breathe in slowly through your nose for two seconds.
2. At the top of the inhale, take another quick inhale through the nose
   for one second. The inhale count is now three.
3. Breathe out through your nose for six seconds, making sure that your
   exhale is twice as long as your inhale.
4. Repeat the exercise at least twice, or as needed throughout the
   dialogue.

A conversational breath takes advantage of several different benefits,
all backed by scientific studies and the methods of those who've
mastered breathing in the most stressful of situations. A conversational
breath also incorporates the three following proven factors. The result
is a slow, controlled breath that you can repeat in a pattern to keep
yourself calm and focused. When your first word is your breath, breathe
like this:

##### 1. To slow down your breathing, breathe through your nose {#to-slow-down-your-breathing-breathe-through-your-nose}

When you breathe through your mouth, the air doesn't meet resistance.
Consequently, you inhale and exhale more per minute. So you breathe
faster. And breathing faster, as you know, is a signal of the ignition
phase. If gone unchecked, mouth breathing can leave you in a state of
low-grade anxiety and stress. Breathing through your nose, on the other
hand, causes greater air resistance. Do me a favor: Try this test. Take
a big breath and exhale through your mouth normally. Now take another
breath and exhale with your lips barely touching, like you're going to
whistle. Finished? On this second breath, the air came out much slower
because your opening was smaller. Your nasal passages are of course much
narrower than your mouth, so your nose naturally encourages slower,
deeper breathing. The very structure of your nasal passages is meant to
filter, warm, and humidify the air you inhale. Nasal breathing also
pulls airflow deeper into your lungs using your diaphragm. That keeps
your breath fuller. And when you take fuller breaths, you take fewer
breaths per minute, preventing signs of ignition. Now that you're filled
with oxygen, let's push the air out, but with purpose.

##### 2. To maintain calm, exhale longer {#to-maintain-calm-exhale-longer}

A 2023 study from Stanford Medicine confirmed powerful benefits
associated with a breathing technique known as a physiological sigh,
noted as one of the fastest ways to de-stress in real time. The
technique involves injecting a controlled, intentional sigh into your
normal breathing. In doing so, start with a double inhalation, which
involves taking a normal breath in through your nose, followed by a
second, sharp inhale, and ending with a long exhale through the mouth.
The exhalation should last around twice as long as the inhalation. A
double inhale fully inflates the lungs, and a long exhale mimics the
effect of the "ah" sound you might release after a big sigh. This method
of prolonged exhalation helps lower blood pressure and reduce stress
levels in the body. The longer exhalation also makes sure that what you
breathe in next is all oxygen and that carbon dioxide gets properly
regulated. When compared with two other breathing techniques,
physiological sighing showed the greatest decrease in anxiety, the most
improvement in mood, and the lowest respiratory rates. To take advantage
of these benefits for yourself, you need to make sure that your exhale
is longer, preferably twice as long as your inhale. Now that you've
taken a full breath, you should feel calmer and more in control of
yourself. But there's one more crucial step so that your next word after
your breath is controlled.

##### 3. To clear your mind, breathe rhythmically {#to-clear-your-mind-breathe-rhythmically}

If you don't think your breath has much to do with controlling verbal
conflict, then it's worth looking at what it means to those who've
mastered it at the furthest extremes of physical conflict. The Navy
SEALs consider rhythmic breathing so mission-critical that they receive
special training in what they call "tactical breathing." In combat
situations, the influx of adrenaline raises a person's heart rate. This
shift causes changes within the body that rapidly deteriorate motor
skills, skills that can mean the difference between life and death. To
control this response, the soldiers often use rhythmic breathing, a
method that relies on a consistent pattern of a set count between
inhalations and exhalations. Box breathing, for example, in which you
inhale, hold, exhale, and hold, each for a measure of four seconds, is a
pattern of rhythmic breathing. It creates intentionality and regularity
in the breath. The benefit of rhythmic breathing is a lower heart rate,
which can sharpen a soldier's mental focus. Rhythmic breathing is one
reason you'll hear military personnel yelling out cadence lyrics while
they run to *one*, *two*, *three*, *four*. The counting synchronizes
their footsteps and, more important, their breath. The repeated pattern
not only helps force carbon dioxide out of their lungs, but the steady
rhythm also prevents hyperventilation or irregular breathing. Military
personnel, law enforcement, first responders, boxers, fighter pilots,
and martial artists regularly face high-stress conflict in which
breathwork is essential for both effective performance and survival. If
controlling their breath is important enough for them, it's important
enough for you. By taking a conversational breath, you'll leverage the
positive effects of intentional breathing. This breath sets the stage
for your next action, one that will give you increased control over your
body and your responses.

#### Your First Thought Is a Quick Scan

The room was dark and moody. It smelled like my momma's essential oil
diffuser. Once my law school classmates and I quieted down, the yoga
instructor told us that we'd be starting with a brief meditation. My
eyebrows shot up. I thought, *Like, meditation meditation? As in, where
you hum and stuff?* Not only had I never tried yoga before, but I had
also never meditated. It's not really all the rage in small-town Texas.
Sitting on our mats, we began by closing our eyes and focusing on taking
full breaths. That sounded easy enough. I could do that. After a few
minutes of breathing, we then performed what the instructor called a
"body scan." With eyes closed, we were told to mentally scan our body,
slowly, starting at our feet and moving upward until we reached the top
of our head. I tried to do what the instructor was telling us and the
only thing I felt was silly. Maybe I was doing it wrong? I opened one
eye to glance around the room. It seemed to be going fine for everyone
else. At that moment I heard the instructor explain that we had to be
still enough to listen to our bodies. I honestly wasn't even sure I
understood what that meant. I closed both eyes again. Trying to refocus,
I took another breath and began to quiet my mind, searching for
something. I waited. And slowly, much to my surprise, as I scanned
upward I noticed physical sensations inside my body that I hadn't picked
up on before. Tension in my face and behind my ears. Lifted shoulders. A
clenched jaw. Breath that was shallow and uneven. How had I not caught
any of this before? My body had been holding this stress and I didn't
even know it. I quickly adjusted by relaxing the muscles of my face and
shoulders. I expanded my breath to use the full capacity of my lungs. I
overheard the instructor tell us to label the first emotion that came to
mind. The word *pressure* rose to the top. Instantly, I felt relief. But
it was more than that. I felt in control. Even with exams coming up, I
immediately felt more at ease and less anxious. After the class was over
and I proved how horrendously inflexible I was, the idea of the body
scan stuck with me. The more I went to yoga, the better I got at body
scanning. I was fascinated with the ways my stress was hiding. It became
something of a game, with me feeling better each time than I had before
I'd scanned. Then I got faster. I could briefly close my eyes at the top
of an inhalation, perform a full body scan, then open my eyes on an
exhalation. Because my body was getting faster at telling me where the
stress points were hiding, I got quicker at locating them and dealing
with them. Labeling my emotions also became easier. What was once a
five-minute exercise at the yoga studio became a quick two-second reset.
I began to think of what I was doing as a "quick scan," and I started
trying it out in different environments, like while in my seat during
class and exams: *worried*. While I was at a red light: *impatient*.
Studying at the kitchen table at our duplex: *overwhelmed*. Whenever a
tense moment bubbled up, a quick scan would dissolve it. Soon, I learned
that if I could do a quick scan before or during a difficult
conversation, not only would the conversation go better, but the other
person wouldn't even notice. I found that I had increased control over
my responses. The ability to hone and attune myself to the sensations
and messages of my own body was a game changer in my communication.
Anytime my body sensed a trigger during an argument or conflict, I
trained myself to release it with a quick scan in order to maintain my
composure. It was like being underwater with a never-ending supply of
oxygen---I never felt the need to come up for air. What's more, my quick
scans enabled me to better realign my mind to the goal and values I
needed for the particular conversation.

#### How to do a quick scan

This is another four-step process. But the more you practice it, the
sooner you'll forget there are any steps at all---it'll become second
nature.

1. Breathe: Begin with a conversational breath. As you inhale, focus on
   letting your breath expand into your stomach, as if a string is
   attached to your belly button and being pulled outward.
2. Close your eyes: At the top of the inhalation, when your lungs are
   full, close your eyes for one to two seconds. It should look almost
   like a long blink.
3. Examine: As you exhale, feel for the places in your body where your
   stress is hiding. Where do you feel discomfort or tightness? Channel
   your long exhalation into that part of your body and release the
   tension. Your eyes should be open.
4. Label the emotion: Say in your head what you're feeling in that
   precise moment. Give it a name. If you can, use just one word. There's
   no right or wrong answer, this should be instinctive.

The point of a quick scan is twofold: Because it's combined with a
conversational breath, quick scanning improves your ability to think
clearly in the moment. Quick scanning also keeps the control over your
emotions in your hands. Once you get comfortable with quick scans, doing
them becomes like taking sips of water during a workout to stay
hydrated. You stay focused and fresh. It's a micro-practice of
mindfulness that helps you to center yourself and become more
self-aware. Gaining greater body awareness also promotes emotional
regulation because it enables you to observe your feelings without
getting overwhelmed by them. As you get more comfortable, you can start
to incorporate quick scans into real conversations. The phrase "I can
tell" is the key to translating your labeled emotion in step four into a
verbal communication. You can reframe an internal label like "I am
angry" into "I can tell that I'm experiencing the feeling of anger."
Instead of keeping your emotions inside and bottling up the stress
(which leads to ignition), saying "I can tell" forces you to get those
feelings out. For example, sticking with the feeling of anger, you could
say out loud, "I can tell I'm getting upset." Your phrasing could also
sound like this:

- Unhappy: "I can tell I'm not in the best mood. Can we please talk
  about this later?"
- Threatened: "I can tell I'm feeling pressured right now. I need time
  to feel more secure."
- Frustrated: "I can tell I'm getting frustrated. I need a time-out."
- Anxious: "I can tell I'm not emotionally prepared for this conversation
  right now."
- Unsettled: "I appreciate this conversation. I can tell there's more for
  me to process."
- Overwhelmed: "I can tell I'm overwhelmed at the moment. Can we take
  this step-by-step?"
- Confused: "I can tell I'm still confused about what you're saying.
  Could you tell it to me differently?"
- Nervous: "I can tell I'm a bit nervous about this decision. I need to
  go over the details again."
- Sad: "I can tell I'm feeling a little overcast. I need some time to
  myself right now."
- Tired: "I can tell I'm not at my best right now. I need to revisit
  this after a break."

By verbally acknowledging what you've found in your quick scan, you take
out the mystery of what's happening to you and where your compass is
pointing---again, keeping you more aware. You've also injected
transparency and honesty into the conversation by being open and direct
as well as making your needs explicit. Quick scans are the best way to
grab hold of yourself and flip through your layers. The add-on of
verbalizing your scan transforms insecurity into a product of confidence
and strength. Because when you claim it, you control it. In the span of
a few seconds, you've taken a conversational breath and you've done a
quick scan. You need only a second more for the last step, one that will
give you the courage to say exactly what you need to say.

#### Your First Conversation Is a Small Talk

Leading up to my first trial as a young lawyer, the opposing counsel
intimidated the heck out of me. He was respectful and nice enough, but
he had thirty-plus years of experience. He knew he was good. And while I
had confidence in my trial skills, I struggled to keep my mind sharp on
the first day of arguments. I was nervous, and I rushed my words. During
cross-examination, I focused on what I had to say next rather than using
that moment to listen to the good information the witness was giving me.
I kicked myself---I knew exactly what I was doing in the moment, but
without pausing for a breath to collect my thoughts or allowing my
awareness to guide me, I couldn't take control of the situation. Driving
home, I talked to myself out loud as I reflected on the highs and lows
of the day. As I spoke, I started to cling to certain bite-size phrases
that stuck out to me. I kept repeating them. "You be Jefferson." "Wait
for the right pitch." "Let the facts tell the truth." These were the
first of what I now call my small talks. They helped remind me to be
myself, to wait for the weak spot in the witness's testimony, and to let
the facts speak for themselves rather than try and do too much. I wrote
these phrases at the top of my yellow legal pad the next morning. When I
used my small talks, the difference in my demeanor and attitude in the
courtroom was like night and day. I felt less insecure, more sure of
myself. I didn't feel rushed. I didn't feel out of step. Even now, I
never go to trial without a small talk written at the top of my yellow
pad. Your mindset begins with your words. When you speak, your words
don't just affect the other person. They also affect you. According to
the latest studies in neuroscience and psychology, your language---that
is, the actual words you use to form your thoughts---significantly
influences your emotions and mindset, and eventually your reality. To
build a mindset of confidence with my clients, I encourage them to use
small talks. A small talk is just that: A small talk with yourself. A
phrase that empowers you. A set of words that re-centers you when you
feel off balance. It's like a positive affirmation. But whereas a
positive affirmation typically includes an abstract statement of
identity or self-empowerment like "I am loved" or "I am enough," a small
talk is more concrete and tied to context, such as: "Start with my
breath." Small talks are powerful memory recall tools. They connect you
to your desired mindset, whether it's to gain more confidence, prevent
yourself from getting defensive, or remind yourself not to sweat the
small stuff. Think of your small talk as your own mini-huddle with
yourself, in which you call the play before you take the field.

#### How to build your own small talk

Building your own small talk is easier than you might think. There are,
however, some guidelines to follow.

##### Tie your small talk to your goals

In chapter two, you learned the importance of understanding your goal
and conversational values before engaging in difficult situations. When
you tie your goal to your small talk, you put a belt and suspenders
around the outcome you want in the interaction. It's like doubling down
on where you want the conversation to go. If your goal is to be
confident, then build a small talk that reminds you to state your ideas
and opinions confidently: "Voice it." Similarly, if your goal is to get
through the conversation without arguing, then craft a small talk that
reinforces that desired outcome: "Seek to understand." This phrase
encourages active listening and empathy, focusing on understanding the
other person's perspective rather than getting drawn into a conflict.
These goal-oriented small talks are personal cues or prompts that remind
you of what you wish to achieve in the conversation, keeping you aligned
with your overarching objectives. They help maintain focus and
direction, especially in moments when it's easy to get sidetracked by
emotions or opposing views.

##### Start with verbs

Instead of more general thoughts of identity, such as "I am strong" or
"I am not my feelings," begin your small talk with a verb. The verb
infuses action, creating active mindsets, like "Stand up" or "Feel,
don't fixate." When you use verbs, the small talks become sharper and
more practical. The verb pushes you to act and behave, transforming what
would be passive contemplation into active engagement. For instance, an
affirmation like "My truth holds value" is passive. "Speak my truth"
urges you to take immediate action, to vocalize your thoughts and
beliefs. Similarly, a phrase like "Welcome the difficult" propels you
forward, promoting an attitude of resilience and readiness to face
obstacles head-on. If I had used a small talk with Bobby LaPray, it
would've been "Find the struggle." These verb-led phrases act as prompts
for specific behaviors, encouraging you not just to think differently
but to do differently. They create a sense of immediacy and urgency,
making the small talk an effective tool for immediate behavioral change
and self-empowerment.

##### Make it short and personal

Remember, your small talk isn't going to be plastered on a billboard. It
doesn't need to resonate, much less be shared, with anyone other than
you. Often, the best small talks are those that tie back to a personal
experience or memory you want to recall or embody in the moment. For
example, I once had a client who wanted a present reminder to stay
assertive when expressing her ideas at work. Her small talk? "Tell 'em,
Doris." It was something her grandfather would playfully say to her
grandmother when she started getting worked up about a topic she was
passionate about. This simple phrase held a wealth of personal meaning
and encouragement for my client. It reminded her of her grandmother's
strength and assertiveness, inspiring her to channel the same energy.
It's a prime example of how a few words, deeply rooted in personal
history, can serve as a powerful anchor in moments of self-doubt or
hesitation. Small talks become more than just words; they are echoes of
encouragement and resilience that resonate uniquely with the individual.
Improving your mindset starts with better selecting your words. You must
choose words that treat you better. Words that serve you better. Words
that move you forward regardless of past experiences that have held you
back. To illustrate, let's assume your small talk is "Stand firm." With
this mindset, in a situation of disagreement, you're encouraged to
select words that empower your autonomy in a positive way rather than
push you down or leave you defeated. Here's what that contrast might
sound like:

- Negative: "You're impossible."
- Positive: (Stand firm.) "I'm interested in a solution. If that's not
  on the table, tell me now."

- Negative: "I can't handle this."
- Positive: (Stand firm.) "I'm choosing to address this another time."

- Negative: "There's no point in trying."
- Positive: (Stand firm.) "I'm not going there with you."

Notice how the positive versions lead you to select words and phrases
that treat you with respect and support your self-esteem. Take a moment
to craft a small talk of your own. Remember, tie it to your goals, start
with a verb, and make it personal to you. To inspire you, here's a quick
list of effective small talks my clients have successfully used:

Confidence

> "Keep your head up."
> "Shine anyway."

Assertiveness

> "Claim your space."
> "Don't aggravate, articulate."

Defensiveness

> "Put it down, \[name\]."
> "Let go, lean in."

Clarity

> "Breathe in, breathe out."
> "Find the heart of it."

Calmness

> "Slow down, \[name\]."
> "Use your anchor."

You can't control other people, but you can control the moment. The
split second before a conversation begins is all the time you need. It's
possibly the most powerful moment of a conversation, and most people
don't even know it exists. Leverage that. Take a conversational breath.
Do a quick scan. Have a small talk with yourself. You may be surprised
at just how well the conversation turns out.

#### CHAPTER SUMMARY

- I'm giving you three tools to take more control over your
  communication: a conversational breath, a quick scan, and a small talk.
- A conversational breath gives you the benefits of slow, controlled
  breathing to keep your mind clear throughout an argument. Starting
  with an inhale through the nose, take a second sharp inhale, then a
  longer exhale, and keep a repeatable rhythm.
- A quick scan of your physical and mental state helps you release
  tension to stay calm and focused. Beginning with a conversational
  breath, close your eyes and examine where your stress is hiding in
  your body, then label what you're feeling.
- A small talk empowers you with a mindset that increases the feeling of
  control you have over your responses. Starting with a verb that
  pushes you to act, like *choose* or *stand*, create a short phrase
  that is meaningful to you and matches your values.
- Each of these three tools helps give you control in conflict by
  preventing you from unknowingly engaging your ignition phase.

### Chapter 6: Control the Pace

"Sir, do you know approximately how fast you were going when the
accident---" "Maybe forty miles per hour," Chuck, my client,
interrupted. "---happened?" the other attorney finished, a hint of
satisfaction in her voice. "I need you to let me get all of my question
out first before you respond, okay?" "Okay," he agreed. "Do you know
approximately how fast you were going when the accident happen---"
"About forty miles per hour," Chuck cut in again. Again, the other
attorney asked him for the space to finish her question. I became
concerned. Attorneys want you to answer their questions quickly because
it means you're not thinking about your answer. You become easier to
control and susceptible to having words put in your mouth. But Chuck
knew better. We'd gone over the need to wait for the other attorney to
get their full question on the record before answering, all part of our
preparation for his deposition. He was starting to rush the tempo. I
needed to get him out of his head. After the next question and answer, I
asked for a quick break to speak with Chuck in the hallway. As we walked
out of the room, I motioned with my yellow notepad to some chairs in the
corner. "Let's go take a seat over there," I said. "Okay," he said,
almost panting. After we sat down, I asked nonchalantly, "So what are
you going to do this weekend? Any plans?" He looked puzzled. "Huh?"
"This weekend," I repeated while unwrapping a peppermint. "What do y'all
have going on?" "Oh. Uh, I'm not sure, let me think." As he thought, he
went quiet. I saw his shoulders lower. His breathing slowed down. After
seven seconds or so, he responded, "We're taking the kids to see that
movie about the talking animals." "The new one that just came out?" I
asked. He gave another short pause. "Yep, that's the one." "Hey, that'll
be fun," I said. "What are their ages again?" "Five and seven," he said
with a smile, now relaxed. The reset worked. "Awesome ages," I said,
standing up no sooner than we had sat down. He stood up too. "Listen," I
told him, "when you go back in there, I want you to treat each question
like she's asking you what you're going to do this weekend. Answer just
like you did with me. Take your moment." Chuck nodded; the analogy
clicked. "Got it. Pause, right. Let it breathe." "Exactly," I said. "You
control the pace. Not her." When we walked back into the deposition
room, the difference was night and day. He never stepped on a question
again, each time taking his moment to consider his answer. The hurried,
almost panicked energy had gone away, replaced by a calm, deliberate
presence. The opposing attorney noticed the change too, her rhythm
disrupted by Chuck's composure. She wasn't able to rush him with
rapid-fire questions. He did great.

#### The Gift of a Pause

When you're anxious, scared, or upset, do you talk faster or slower? You
talk faster. It's a sign of your ignition phase, and it's normal. The
increased heart rate speeds up your thought processes, readying you for
split-second reactions. Reflexes become quicker. Speed becomes the
priority. As a result, your mind starts to think faster than your mouth
can often get out the words. That's why you tend to speak much faster
than you normally would. The desire to rush causes you to emotionally
react rather than logically respond. You may be familiar with the more
technical phrase: putting your foot in your mouth. When you rush, you
not only expose yourself to the obvious issues like stumbling over your
words and leaving thoughts half-expressed, but you also rush your point.
You miss the chance to fully develop your position. Rushing your words
also signals that you're not really listening, instead conveying that
you were already planning out your sentence before hearing the other
person's words. You miss things. In these types of scenarios where you
feel yourself speeding up, there's a misplaced belief that you have zero
control over it. That you're simply along for the ride. But the truth is
that your foot is on the brake the whole time. You just need to push. In
addition to the tools that you learned in the prior chapter, there's one
piece of your communication that will separate you from the rest.

A well-timed pause.

Silence may be the absence of sound, but it's not the absence of
communication. I mean it when I say this: silence is the most effective
tool at your disposal to fix communication problems.

Why don't more people use it? The issue is twofold. For one, many people
avoid silence because they don't see it as optimal. Part of that thought
comes from the standard of speed in communication you see in modern
media. Podcast and social media clips are edited down to remove pauses.
Movies and television shows often dramatize the impact of quick
dialogue, making it seem as though everyone already knows what they're
going to say. Well, that's because actors have the benefit of a written
script and film editors. It's not real-life communication. Take the
talking heads on the nightly news as another example. Outlets tend to
showcase opposing viewpoints, whether that's in politics or sports,
through quick retorts or "clapbacks," as if they're the pinnacle of
intellectual victory. It has the effect of skewing perception that speed
is preferred over substance. Arguments in the real world don't happen
like they do in the media. It's not a healthy metric. Second, people
tend to fear that silence shows weakness. In more professional
environments, for instance, there's a pervasive thought that not
responding immediately to questions, whether in email or in person,
demonstrates a lack of knowledge or preparation. That fear drives you to
prioritize immediacy, sometimes at the expense of accuracy or
thoughtfulness. In everyday conversations too, you may find yourself
using verbal fillers to fill the silence with speech (think "you know")
or sound (think "uh" and "um"). There's a sense that silence conveys
incompetence, when in reality, silence is wisdom in waiting. It's
rushing your words that shows weakness. Slowing your words shows
strength. By understanding how to use pauses, you enhance your image of
competence and show that you're someone who is more deliberate and
therefore more credible. Rather than thinking that silence shows
uncertainty, take the mindset that silence ensures what follows is
*certain*. The strategic use of silence reflects intention, not
hesitation. When well timed, pauses are a sign of confidence and
self-control. More often than not, the person who controls the pace of
the conversation is the person most in control of themselves. That's
what's so powerful about a pause. It gifts you with the ability to
control time. Here's what that control over time provides you with:

- Time to reflect. Pauses give you space to choose. It's a mindset
  that no one can make you say anything that you don't want to say.
  You can choose to respond if you wish, sure. But you can also choose
  to say nothing. No response is still a response. You have the
  choice, always. Pauses give you time not just to choose your words,
  but to own them. When you pause, you're not only controlling the
  conversation's pace. You're affirming your presence in it. This time
  to reflect isn't about hesitation---it's about deliberate
  acknowledgment that you know who you are. When you pause before
  responding, it demonstrates that you are in control of your emotions
  and thoughts. You're showing the other person that you're not swayed
  by impulse but guided by thoughtfulness. Every time you hold back
  words, you're putting your value, your confidence, and your power on
  display. Pauses give you the power to choose and decide: Is this
  person worth my peace of mind? Is what I want to say something that
  needs to be said? Does it need to be said now? And am I the one to
  say it? Will my words help or hurt the conversation? Am I speaking
  to provide value, or just speaking to hear myself? Will my words
  make progress toward my goals and values? Is there more I need to
  understand before I respond? Words that come after a deliberate
  choice of silence have more impact because they indicate that what
  follows has been measured, adding weight to your meaning.
- Time to reconsider. A pause gives you time to compose your
  behavior, as with a conversational breath, a quick scan, or a small
  talk. It provides an assessment of your readiness to be present in
  the moment. It preserves your energy, like a rest between sets
  during a hard workout. The use of silence is also critical to
  evaluating the world around you. You can read the room. You get the
  chance to observe their reactions, expressions, and body language.
  By pausing, you're taking the other person's temperature. It pulls
  you out of only focusing on what you're trying to say and instead
  puts your five senses to work on first figuring out what they're
  trying to tell you. It's the difference between running into
  conflict bullheaded versus having the wherewithal to say to
  yourself, *Wait,* is this really *what I want to say?* A pause
  allows you to step back and consider whether the direction of the
  conversation is aligning with your desired goals and values for the
  conversation. The external observation that a pause allows informs
  and guides you in how to proceed---whether to soften your approach,
  reaffirm your stance, or introduce a new angle.
- Time to regulate. When things start to get heated in
  conversation, silence serves as a wet blanket. It puts distance
  between the stimulus and the response, reducing the intensity of
  rising emotions. It allows fires to burn out. That's why silence is
  crucial to getting to the cooling point. It allows you to
  recalibrate your tone. A pause makes the strategic choice to avoid
  saying something that could make matters worse. It shows maturity
  and wisdom. It puts you as the bigger person. You get to decide when
  there's been enough said. You get to decide when you're done, rather
  than it ending on their terms. And not only does a pause help you
  regulate your own emotions, but it also helps the other person
  reflect on theirs. It breaks the cycle of rapid response, preventing
  both of you from losing your cooling phases. That's a big deal.
  Pauses keep arguments more fractured because they prevent the
  back-and-forth rhythm that quickly ramps up tension. That's a good
  thing. They keep both of you from "flooding" because you're
  inserting space in between to keep yourselves clearheaded. Don't
  allow the misconceptions of silence to keep you from accepting the
  power of your pause. Use it to control time in your favor, creating
  opportunities for meaningful thought and contemplation in every
  conversation.

#### How and When to Use Pauses

If you want to speak with more control, you have to be more comfortable
with silence. There's no getting around it. What will you say with
yours? The silence of a pause does communicate something. Again, it may
be the absence of sound, but it's not the absence of communication.
Consider the different messages and signals that can be sent by a pause:

- A pause after the first time he says, "I love you."

- A pause after she asks, "Do you like my new dress?"

- A pause after everyone yells, "Surprise!"

- A pause after she asks, "Where were you last night?"

What a pause says to someone is largely determined by how long it is.
For example, if I don't respond to your text within five minutes,
typically it's no problem. But five days? Then I communicate something
else. In the following pages, I've outlined this distinction and how you
can best take advantage of the unique strengths of a pause depending on
how long you let the silence last, turning each moment of quiet into a
powerful tool for communication.

##### Short pauses are reading glasses

A short pause is between one and four seconds. Short pauses bring
emphasis and focus on specific words, like putting on a pair of glasses
to read the fine print. You see the words better. Short pauses convey
that what you're about to say has been thought about. That you've taken
time to weigh and measure your words. For example, imagine that someone
in the office asks you, "Will you have that report back by this
afternoon?" A short pause changes your sense of control:

- Without a pause, you snap back, "I've already said that I won't."

- After a four-second pause, you slowly respond, "I've already said that
  I won't."

Did the voice in your head read that same phrase differently the second
time? With just a few seconds of silence, you sound firmer. More sure of
yourself. Let's try an even simpler one. This time, imagine a friend
asks you, "How are you doing?" Again, watch the contrast in tone.

- Without a pause, you quip, "I'm good."

- After a three-second pause, you reply, "I'm good."

Did you hear it? The immediate answer conveys that you hardly put any
thought into what you said, almost dismissive or flippant. It may have
even sounded less genuine. Add a pause, however, and it shows that you
thought about your answer. And that gives your answer more force and
effect. You know that you're good. Short pauses are great for answering
normal questions, especially if you're in an interview or deposition
situation. I tell my clients to add a few seconds of silence after the
questions and before their responses. Remember, *your first word is your
breath*. Not only does it give you time to consider and replay their
question in your mind, but what you say comes out more controlled. A
short pause is also good for adding emphasis, such as pausing before a
punch line or just the right...word. The silence grabs attention like a
cliffhanger. It sparks curiosity about what you will say next. It's
another reason why a conversational breath is so crucial---it's a short
pause. Normally, when you talk, you breathe in on the inhale and speak
on the exhale. The inhale of a conversational breath is three seconds
total, which is just enough time to allow you to realign yourself to
center and speak with a controlled, even tone on the exhale. The person
who pauses before responding---whether it's in the classroom, boardroom,
or living room---will almost always come across as more controlled and
confident.

##### Long pauses are mirrors

A long pause is anywhere between five and ten seconds. Any longer than
that and it's not a pause. It's a time-out. Unlike short pauses for
focus, long pauses are for reflection. Like a two-sided mirror. Long
pauses not only allow you to reflect on your response, but more
important, they force the other person to look back at themselves at the
same time. When someone is rude to you, insults you, or belittles you, a
long pause is your greatest weapon. Here's why:

1. Five to ten seconds of silence gives enough time for their words to
   echo back to them. The sound of their comment will linger in the
   air and will often make them question or doubt their message.
   That's why sometimes someone will use this silence to preemptively
   say, "I'm sorry," or "I shouldn't have said that," before you need
   to respond.
2. Silence can never be misquoted. It's far better to respond with
   nothing than with something hurtful that is sure to go down in
   your relationship history book to be cited again and again when
   problems reappear.
3. The person who speaks last often loses. In negotiations, they say
   the person to speak first loses. But in arguments, it's the
   opposite. Why? Because the only way to beat someone saying hurtful
   things is to say something more hurtful. The only way to outdo
   someone's cutting comment is to cut deeper. When you force
   yourself to have the last word, you'll likely be the one expected
   to apologize first. By inserting a long pause, stopping yourself
   from having the last say, you leave the other person's words
   exposed.

Long pauses work particularly well with people who aren't telling you
the truth. As you can imagine, as a trial attorney, I've heard a lot of
witnesses lie. You become so used to it that you really don't get
surprised anymore when people lie to you. Even under oath. In this one
particular case, during a deposition, I knew the witness was lying to
me. I knew he was lying because I had the evidence. He was an
eighteen-wheeler driver who had crashed into my client and blamed the
wreck on another vehicle. The driver's cell phone records showed that he
had sent a text from his phone at the exact same time as the accident,
as well as other texts leading up to the wreck. But he didn't know that
I had them. "Were you texting while driving?" I asked point-blank.
"Nope," he answered firmly. "I never text when I'm driving." His first
mistake, using an absolute. Never. When someone uses an absolute, they
typically walk themselves out on a plank. So if they're going to say
never, it had better be never. I used a long pause, about eight seconds,
while his words lingered. His eyes began to dart around the table. He
started to shift his weight in his seat. Having had enough time to hear
his words echo back to him, he broke the silence and changed what he had
just said. "I mean, I say never. I guess sometimes I do. I mean, it just
depends on the situation, you know. I honestly don't remember." His
second mistake. He started to back out of his answer---in Texas, we call
that *crawfishin'*. I gave it another long pause. This time, ten
seconds. Enough to make it almost uncomfortable. Honest people don't
mind the discomfort of a pause. It's in the silence that honest people
know their truth has no need to hide. Dishonest people, on the other
hand, typically can't stand it. It's in the silence that dishonest
people feel as if they have everything to prove. They sense you're not
taking the bait. They'll fill the space for you, having conversations in
their head about what you're thinking or going to say. They often
unravel their own stories in their eagerness to fill the void. Sensing
his retreat, I gave him a choice: come back to the truth or walk off the
plank. I repeated my original question. "Were you texting while
driving?" "I might've been, yeah," he said, sounding almost relieved. I
put my hand on a folder of papers next to me at the table. It was just a
stack of other documents. The actual cell phone records were still in my
bag. With my hand still on the folder, I pressed him: "You were texting
your coworker." He nodded, and said, "Yeah." In only a few minutes, he
had made a full 180-degree turn. No arguments. No yelling. No shouting,
"You can't handle the truth!" All I had done was use the power of a long
pause. He saw how his words looked in the mirror and did the rest. In
chapter eight, I'm going to teach you how to refine your pause
techniques to most effectively respond to those who say things to hurt
you. For now, all you need to know is that different situations call for
different pauses. Whether you're dealing with a direct confrontation,
navigating a tricky professional conversation, or simply engaging in a
deep, personal dialogue, the right pause at the right time can transform
the dynamics of the exchange to put you in control. It's about more than
just silence. It's about controlling time to slow down your reactions
and build space for reflection, reconsideration, and regulation.

#### CHAPTER SUMMARY

- A well-timed pause credits you with the power of time. Time to
  reflect, time to reconsider, and time to regulate.
- Pausing in an argument isn't a sign of hesitation. It's a sign of
  intention and self-control. More often than not, the person who
  controls the pace of the conversation is the person most in control
  of themself.
- Words that come after a deliberate choice of silence have more impact
  because they indicate that what follows has been measured, adding
  weight to the meaning.
- The length of a pause is useful for different contexts. A short pause
  of one to four seconds before responding or answering a question
  makes you sound stronger and more resolute. A longer pause of five
  to ten seconds creates anticipation and serves as a mirror that
  engages the cooling phase.
- When you embrace the silence of a pause, you take control of the speed
  of a conflict. It's like using the brakes on a car: controlling the
  speed of the interactions lets you safely steer it toward a more
  constructive outcome.

## Rule 2: Say It with Confidence

### Chapter 7: Assertive Voice

You're a volunteer test subject in a study on feelings. Doctors attach
all sorts of sticky pads and wires to your head and chest to monitor
your vitals. One scientist walks up to you with his wooden clipboard and
notepad. He demands, "Feel happy right this instant." You give him a
puzzled look. *Feel happy? About what?* Sure, you try on a fake smile
and force some laughter, but it's far from the real thing. You try to
think of something to be happy about. But it's just not working. The
scientist scribbles on his notepad. Then he demands, "Feel scared right
this instant." Just like last time, you struggle to feel scared.
Admittedly, all the wires and monitors are sort of weird, but you're not
truly scared. You try to recall the last scary movie you saw, but your
mind wanders and you think about the fact that world news is scarier
than most movies. The scientist writes down more notes. This time, the
scientist takes in a big breath and instructs you, "Feel mad right this
instant." But as soon as the word *instant* comes out of his mouth---
*whop!*---he slams his clipboard on the top of your head. Immediately,
your eyebrows shoot down as you give him a look. *I know you didn't just
do what I think you did.* You're shocked and offended. Most of all, you
instantly feel *mad*. The scientist smiles. "Now feel forgiveness!"

#### Confidence Is a Feeling

"Jefferson, how do I feel confident?" Whether it's about navigating the
workplace, acing an interview, or speaking up for yourself, it's by far
the most-asked question I receive. It's also the wrong question to ask.
Feelings can't be flipped on like a light switch. They come from
something, like a bad memory, a happy thought, or a stressful
environment. They arise for a reason, like a hit on the head. Confidence
works the same way. Confidence is a feeling. It can't be summoned at
will. You can't call it off the bench. That's why it's often not there
when you need it. You know confidence when you feel confidence. It's the
ability to operate under a feeling of knowledge and appreciation for
your strengths as well as your limits. So, to ask "How do I feel
confident?" is like asking "How do I feel mad?" It doesn't work like
that. The only way to feel more confident is to live it out more fully.
Confidence is an active process that you build and accumulate by
engaging in specific behaviors. The question isn't "How do I feel
confident?" The question is "What can I do to create experiences that
build my confidence?" Confidence is found in the doing. And that doing
is called assertiveness. Confidence is as assertive does. Assertiveness
is how you express confidence. Unlike confidence, which is a feeling,
asserting is an action. You can think of it as confidence is an inside
thing, while assertiveness is an outside thing. To assert yourself is
confidence in motion. Assertiveness is found in the way you say things,
the way you lean into your words. Confidence and assertiveness feed into
each other. Together, the pair creates a positive feedback loop:
speaking more assertively produces the feeling of confidence, while the
feeling of newfound confidence emboldens you to speak more assertively.
It's a life-changing combo. To be able to stand up for your needs and
opinions in a way that gains you credibility rather than takes it away
is a power beyond words. How do you speak assertively? I'll show you.
But this isn't something to read once and expect that you'll magically
remember it when you need it. Rather, take one of the following ten
lessons and apply it to your next conversation. Your assertiveness
training starts now. Don't make me get my clipboard.

#### 10 Ways to Practice Assertiveness Now {#ways-to-practice-assertiveness-now}

Assertiveness begins with the basics. You'll start by building a
vocabulary of assertive words and commonly used phrases that conveys
confidence without aggression. Then, you'll learn the particular sound
and intonation patterns that embody self-respect. In conversations,
emails, texts, and videoconferences, you'll begin to spot the
opportunities to stand your ground with firm kindness. Soon enough,
you'll find yourself fully immersed in the language of assertiveness,
and before you know it, you'll feel confident in any conversation
without a second thought. Let's begin.

##### Lesson 1: Every word matters

Above all the tips and tricks about how to be more assertive, nothing
matters more than word choice. The language you choose---each and every
word you select---directly impacts your ability to assert yourself.
Every email you write, every text you send. Every. Word. Matters. As I
asked at the start of this book: Who do your words say you are? Actions
often speak louder than words, but they're not a replacement. There's
power in a spoken word. Your words are your personality, your
reputation, and your character. Investing in your words and phrasing is
investing in your future self---your self-esteem and the person you want
to be. For example, imagine a simple email to a coworker: "I just wanted
to touch base on the outline." Now, let's adjust one word: "I wanted to
touch base on the outline." Do you sense the difference? One sentence
signals caution. The other builds confidence. With one word removed, the
sentence takes on a new voice. The first sentence, with *just*, sounds
almost hesitant, as if you don't mean to bother them (even though you
do). The second sentence asserts exactly what you want to do. Here are a
few more before-and-afters:

- Unsure: "I'm sort of wondering if I should maybe ask the team."

- Assertive: "I'll ask the team."

- Unsure: "I guess I'm just looking for a bit more clarity on your
  > expectations."

- Assertive: "I need more clarity on your expectations."

What assertiveness requires isn't difficult. You can do this. You know
this. You have all the skills already inside you to unlock a new voice.
Once you begin to open your eyes to the everyday uncertain language used
in your communication as well as in others', wasted words will start to
stick out to you like sore thumbs. You'll never be able to unsee them.

##### Lesson 2: Prove it to yourself

Confidence is found in the doing, remember? To feel confident, you need
to begin proving to yourself that you'll do what you say you'll do. That
means you'll inform the other person of your next step, then you'll take
it. The key is to say it out loud. Say what you're doing, or going to
do, out loud and in the present tense. For example:

- "I'm moving forward from this conversation."

- "I'm asking for your permission."

- "I'm setting a reminder."

It's not "I kind of" or "I sort of" or "I guess." Take out the
hesitation by voicing your actions and intentions. Here's another that I
see all the time in emails: "Please see the attached." What does that
even mean? Of course they're going to see it. You put it in the email.
Of course they know it's attached. They can see the attachment.

*Please* doesn't add any value. This phrasing is passive and weak, as if
you have no role in it. Maybe it doesn't bother you. But why pass over
even the smallest opportunity to demonstrate confidence in your
communication, credibility, or reputation? "I'm attaching the contract,"
or even "I attached the contract," sounds more forward, more active, and
more assertive. You're leaning into your confidence by telling them what
you're doing and then doing it. The effect of telling the other person
what you're going to do is secondary to the major effect it has on you.
There is a sense of empowerment you'll receive when you claim your words
and see them through to fulfillment, like telling yourself, "Hey, I've
got this." You're proving to yourself that you believe in your own
abilities---small, assertive actions that accumulate into experiences
that build your confidence. These steps make even bigger impacts when it
comes to enforcing boundaries, as you'll learn in chapter nine. By
telling people what you're going to do and then doing it, you're proving
that you're the kind of person who, when you say something, you mean it.
Otherwise, you're bound to get walked over. Imagine that you're in a
heated argument. The exchange has escalated to the point where the
personal attacks intensify, and you feel the need to disengage. In a
high pitch you shout, "I swear if you say that one more time, I'm
leaving! I'm so over this, I mean it!" Without hesitation, the other
person says it again. But you don't *leave*. You stay, continuing to
argue and yell, exacerbating the situation. Did you build your
credibility or take away from it? What's worse, you undermined yourself.
Now, the other person knows that you're not serious. You've established
a baseline that you're all bark and no bite. Take back control with
assertive language and lean in. Tell them what you're going to do, then
do it:

- Instead of abruptly leaving and slamming the door, say, "I'm going to
  > leave the room"---and then do so.

- Instead of suddenly hanging up the phone, say, "I'm going to end the
  > call"---and then do so.

Think of it like calling your shot in a game of pool. Acting in line
with your aim demonstrates self-assurance. You're conveying that you're
not afraid to state your intention. You believe in your ability to
deliver. And when you follow through, you solidify that belief. This
consistency is part of the positive feedback loop, in which you say what
you're going to do and you do it. And you'll feel more confident the
next go-around. Confidence is showing up and proving to yourself that
you'll be there when you say you will. When you honor your
self-promises, meet your own expectations, and use assertive language,
you will increase your ability to rely on yourself.

##### Lesson 3: Express your needs unapologetically

Imagine that you're the best lawyer in the world. You're wearing
professional clothes and exuding confidence. Your client is the real
you, in plain clothes, as if you've made a current duplicate of yourself
with all your same wants, needs, and worries. You're in a big corporate
room where other people sit at the table opposite you and your client.
You pat your client on the shoulder and tell them to take a seat while
you remain standing. In this moment, you know that if you don't speak up
for your client, nobody else will. You are your client's only hope.
You're prepared, and you understand exactly what your client wants. As
the meeting begins, you speak out on behalf of your client:

- "My client won't accept that."

- "My client wants fair expectations."

- "My client needs assurance this won't happen again."

As you stick up for your client, you sound strong. You sound assertive.
You're not just participating; you're leading the conversation with
confidence, fiercely advocating for your client's needs and rights.
Every word you choose is deliberate, aiming to protect and promote your
client's best interests and ensuring that your client is treated with
the dignity they deserve. And as you do, you realize the power of your
voice. Now, with the same power and tone, the same sense of justice,
replace *my client* with *I*. "I won't accept that." "I want fair
expectations." "I need assurance this won't happen again." That's
advocating for yourself. To be more assertive, set your default to
stating your needs. Begin sentences with "I need." This simple shift in
language empowers you to take ownership of your wants and to communicate
them clearly.

- "I need a moment."

- "I need to speak with you."

- "I need you to know how that affected me."

- "I need your help."

You can't speak assertively without knowing how to assert your needs.
You have to be your own advocate. That means you're going to stop
over-apologizing. No, not the real apologies. I'm talking about the fake
ones, the unnecessary ones, the ones that don't mean anything. The *I'm
sorry*s that you litter onto your requests, questions, or
clarifications, like:

- "Hey, I'm so sorry, do you have a quick minute?"

- "No, I can't today. I'm sorry!"

- "So sorry to bother you."

- "Sorry, I'm not sure I understand."

- "I'm sorry, can you repeat that?"

The word *sorry* might feel safe, but it does more harm than good for
your self-esteem. Save the real *I'm sorry*s for when it matters, like
asking for forgiveness, owning up to a mistake, or sympathizing with
someone else's pain. Instead of over-apologizing, use words of
gratitude, or nothing at all.

- Before: "Sorry I'm late."

- After: "Thank you for your patience." `[*]`

- Before: "Sorry to bother you."

- After: "I appreciate your help."

- Before: "Sorry for all the questions."

- After: "Thank you for clarifying that for me."

Whether you realize it or not, over-apologizing takes a toll on your
mindset. You'll see yourself more as a nuisance or annoyance. Know this:
your self-worth isn't tied to how little an inconvenience you can be.
Asserting your needs and voicing them in a way that maintains respect
and credibility is never inconvenient---it's necessary.

##### Lesson 4: Speak when it matters

At my prior law firm, I was in a heated partners' meeting discussing
typical end-of-year topics like bonuses, salary raises, and next-year
initiatives. Every time progress seemed to be made, it never failed: one
person found a way to make a comment or poke holes in whatever was being
proposed. This person did so regardless of whether the comment was
relevant, derailing the decision and prolonging the meeting. I'm all in
favor of a devil's advocate on ideas, but this person relished
highlighting "but what if" problems without any interest in taking
ownership of the solutions. You know the type. This person would audibly
complain about how stressed they were while also working the least. It
was open knowledge that this person had the fewest hours and billings of
everyone at the table. The least amount of grip on the pulse of the firm
and its direction. The person was "all hat and no cattle," a Texan way
of saying they're all talk, no action. The more this person spoke, the
more respect and credibility they lost. With each chime-in, more people
groaned, sighed, or rolled their eyes. The most valued senior partner,
however, hardly spoke. When this partner did, though, everyone stopped
and paid attention. The silence wasn't due to a lack of interest but
rather an understanding of when this partner's voice was needed. It's
frequently the person who knows the least, has contributed the least, or
whose opinion matters the least who has the most to say. I'm sure you've
been in a virtual meeting where the least-informed person is typically
the one who feels the urge to put in their two cents toward every minor
issue. One of the biggest separators between those who show confidence
and those who don't is how often they feel the need to say something.
It's a dead giveaway. I'm not saying that you shouldn't chime in,
express concern, or be a team player. The point I'm making is that
insecure people often have the urge to say *everything*. Their
insecurity convinces them that they have everything to prove. Everyone
must know how smart they are, how right they are, how "better than you"
they are. The fact that they feel unsure of themselves drives their
desire to make certain that you think they aren't. This insecurity
manifests in apparent ways: name-dropping, one-upping, or an insistence
on having the last word. Confident people have the urge to say
*nothing*. There is wisdom in their silence. They're listening. They're
observing, absorbing. Confident people know that they have nothing to
prove because they have an assurance in their abilities and knowledge.
They trust themselves without regard to external validation. Because
they feel sure of themselves, there's no desire to seek the limelight.
If an insecure person can't feel confident about their contribution,
they'll choose to feel confident in their criticism. Don't be that
person. And the next time you see it, understand that they're scratching
their insecurity itch. Let it be a reminder that true confidence chooses
the moment of input.

##### Lesson 5: Say less

The fewer the words, the clearer the point. Think of conversation like
supply and demand. Economics says that when you have too much of
something, people want it less. The oversupply decreases the price.
Conversely, where there is too little of something, people want it more.
The demand drives the price up. The same principle applies to
communication. The more words you use, the less I want to listen and the
less value your words have. But the fewer words you use, the more I want
to pay attention and the more value each word holds. Each word has
impact. When you flood the market of conversation with excessive words,
you create a deficit of attention. This is also why overexplaining kills
confidence. The more words you use, the less you actually say. Using too
many words to say something small creates a big problem. The temptation
to overexplain stems from the fear that the other person isn't going to
believe you (a social evaluation trigger). But the more words you use,
the less believable you sound. The more words it takes to tell the
truth, the more it sounds like a lie. The longer you talk, the more it
sounds like you don't know what you're talking about.

##### Lesson 6: Remove filler words

You know them as the *um*s, *ah*s, and *uh*s that delay your speech.
Fillers are natural and common. They're mostly used subconsciously as a
way to fill the gaps of silence and keep up the sound of conversation.
In an informal setting with friends and family, they're no issue. Simple
filler words can help maintain the flow of conversation. You don't even
really hear them because you're relaxing and relating on a deeper level.
But in a more formal or professional setting, they signal hesitation and
water down your confidence. Verbal crutches convey that you're not
prepared or that you're less confident about what you're saying. Some
filler words you may not even notice:

- "Like"

- "You know?" or "You know what I mean?"

- "Right?" or "I know, right?"

- "So, yeah"

Instead, simply replace your fillers with *silence*. Notice the
difference:

- Before: "So, yeah, um, like, okay, you know how when you talk with
  > fillers, they sort of, like, distract from, like, your message,
  > right?"

- After: "When you talk with fillers, they distract from your message."

See? Even trying to read the before passage, you can't quickly ascertain
what it's saying. Fix it by embracing the silence. When you first try
this method, you will likely speak more slowly because you're putting
intention into the next word to prevent a filler from taking its place.
That's okay. Resist the urge to fill the air with noise. Get comfortable
with silence. As you learned in chapter six, silence adds pauses and
gives you better control. It presents you with the option to add
emphasis. In your head, using this method may feel awkward or weird. But
to the listener, you sound intentional and confident with your words.
Filler words add no value to the listener. Every unnecessary word
detracts from your message. Remove the words that water down your
sentences. If you want to sound assertive, serve your words neat.

##### Lesson 7: Never undersell

If you don't believe your words have value, neither will the other
person. Using phrases that undervalue your worth will slowly eat away at
your confidence. Phrases like:

- "I hate to bother you."

- "I know this might sound stupid."

- "Forgive me for the dumb question."

- "I'm probably missing something here."

- "You probably know better than me."

Listen. I understand that you saying these things comes from a good
place---I do. You want to soften your approach, almost in a humble,
self-deprecating tone. And that's admirable. But it's not often received
that way by the listener. Instead, the signal you're sending is that you
see yourself as less. It sounds more like you're hedging to lower their
expectations of your contribution. It casts a shadow of doubt over your
capabilities before you've even fully shared them. As a result, the
other person will associate these words with your actual impact and
influence. That is, when you say, "I hate to bother you," what the other
person hears is: "What I'm about to tell you will bother you." Or that
what you're about to say will sound stupid, or the question you're about
to ask is dumb. None of these messages are assertive. It's similar to
the discussion about over-apologizing. It's like you're apologizing for
taking up space, which is the exact opposite of assertive language. When
you use these sorts of phrases, you also put a social obligation on the
other person to relieve or forgive you by saying, "Oh, you're not
bothering me," or "It's not a dumb question." It forces the two of you
to have a mini conversation about your insecurity before you even get to
your point. By framing your interactions with an undersell, you
inadvertently reinforce the idea that your voice is not worth hearing,
or is worth less than others'. You also undersell yourself when you add
the phrase "Does that make sense?" after your sentence. I understand
that it comes from a need to feel assured that what you said came across
the right way, that you're seeking validation that what you said
actually made sense. But in reality, the phrase sets you up for a
lose-lose situation. At best, it makes you sound like you're unsure of
yourself. Like you don't believe in what you said. For example, "I was
thinking we could move tomorrow's meeting due to the weather, with
traffic and all. Does that make sense?" And at worst, you risk offending
your listener, because it assumes that they may not have understood what
you said, when they definitely did. For instance, "So you just connect
these two parts here and it'll start working. Does that make sense?" To
prevent either of these undesirable outcomes, it's best to totally omit
the question or replace it with "What are your thoughts?" or "How does
that sound?" Every time you catch yourself about to downplay your
presence, pause and reconsider how you can phrase your thoughts
assertively, without<x_bin_397>A key here is to avoid uptalk, the tendency to tilt your words with an
upward inflection at the end. It's a rising intonation, the kind you use
when you're asking a question, like "Are you sure?" The sound suggests
uncertainty, or a request for approval, even when the statements are
declarative. To sound more confident, end your sentences with a downward
or neutral inflection. Think of it as asking a family member to pass the
salt while you're eating dinner. You wouldn't use uptalk and say, "Can
you please pass the salt?" as if you don't know what salt is or doubt
their ability to pass it. You most likely use a neutral tone, more akin
to a statement, where your tone doesn't rise but stays the same. Eye
contact is another vital component of assertive communication. It
signals engagement, sincerity, and confidence. In a meeting, when you're
sharing an idea or feedback, maintaining moderate eye contact with your
listeners shows that you are confident in your contributions. It says,
"I believe in what I'm saying, and I'm here, present, with you in this
conversation." Avoiding eye contact, on the other hand, can make you
appear uncertain or disinterested, while too much eye contact might be
perceived as confrontational. If you struggle to make eye contact,
here's one trick I use: wait to make eye contact until the last few
words of your sentence; end with eye contact. You may be under the
impression that you're supposed to maintain eye contact the entire time.
Not true. In fact, prolonged eye contact may make you come across as
either too intense or, heaven forbid, even kind of creepy. Instead,
catch their eye at the end of your sentence. You won't lose any
effectiveness. Cadence, the rhythm and pace of your speech, also
matters. An assertive cadence involves speaking clearly at a measured
pace, allowing your words to be fully understood without rushing or
hesitating. It's about giving each word its due, showing that you've
thought about what you're saying and you mean it. For instance, when
proposing a new strategy, speaking too quickly might suggest nervousness
or a lack of confidence in your own idea, while speaking too slowly
could be interpreted as uncertainty. Together, a controlled tone,
appropriate eye contact, and a deliberate cadence can significantly
enhance the effectiveness of your communication. They make your
assertiveness not only heard, but felt and seen. Whether you're asking
for a promotion, setting a boundary, or simply expressing an opinion,
how you present your message can be as impactful as the message itself.
These elements, combined with clear, respectful language, define
assertive communication and enable it to be a powerful tool for
personal and professional growth. I want you to quickly scan back over
the ten lessons of this chapter. Pick the one that you wrestle with the
most. Make that one lesson your focus for today, or tomorrow, or this
week. Begin using those assertive words and phrases when the opportunity
comes in the next conversation, the next text. See how it makes you
feel. See how other people respond. And see how it makes you want to
assert yourself more. Using assertive words will build your confidence.
And your growing confidence will cause you to speak more assertively
more often. It's a positive feedback loop. So feed it. Once you feel
good about using phrases from the lesson you picked out, start adding
phrases from another lesson. Don't wait to find the right words to say
two days later. Build your assertiveness vocabulary so that you know
what to say now.

#### CHAPTER SUMMARY

- Confidence is a feeling, not a thing you can summon. You build
  > confidence through being assertive; together, they create a positive
  > feedback loop. The more assertive you are, the more confident you
  > feel, and the more confident you feel, the more assertive you are.

- Word choice matters. Typically, the fewer words you use, the more
  > confident you sound.

- Eliminate unnecessary apologies and filler words to increase the
  > strength of your sentences.

- When you unlock your assertive voice, you empower yourself to express
  > your needs with confidence.

#### Side Note

`*` Unless you're really late, in which case you should apologize.

### Chapter 8: Difficult People

Legal disputes between family members are the worst. Between friends is
a close second. The people you let into your life know a lot about you:
what makes you happy and what makes you upset. When close relationships
go south, they can be the nastiest sort of conflict, the type that
brings out the absolute worst in a person. Sometimes the most difficult
people in your life are either related to you or have a history with
you, making the tough talks even tougher. Maybe you can relate. I once
had a case involving two middle-aged sisters. And it was about as fun as
it sounds. My client wanted to keep the business that the two had
inherited operating and successful. The other sister wanted to sell the
business and split the profits, on account of her having, let's just
say, different life goals. They needed a clean break from what had
become a constant source of conflict between them. The plan was for my
client to buy out her sister's shares. Despite multiple attempts to
negotiate, my client's generosity and patience were continually met with
stubbornness and, at times, outright hostility. The other sister
insisted on painting my client as the antagonist of the story. When my
client presented reasonable solutions, the other sister would find a way
to twist her words and resort to hurtful comments and insults that went
back as far as when they were kids. Things she knew would hurt. "How
long do I keeping playing nice?" my client asked me during a phone call.
"You always play nice," I said. "That doesn't mean you play soft. You
don't need to push back. You just can't be pushed over." Acknowledging
that she'd tried everything to keep it peaceful and respect what her
parents would want, my client had found her limit. Trying to "work it
out" wasn't working. She needed a different strategy. Using the lessons
you'll learn in this chapter, my client began standing up for herself in
conversations with her sister. She started to find her voice. The two
agreed to meet in person (with attorneys) to try one last time to
resolve their issues. My client was nervous walking in, but I could tell
she had a new sense of confidence when she spoke. The discussion started
off fine, but it wasn't long before the sister began ramping up the
drama. At one point, she threw out something that was more than a
comment. It was a grenade: "And I've never liked you. You're dead to me
anyway." My client went silent. I knew from our many conversations that
her sister's words cut like a knife. After using a long pause, she
finally spoke. "I need you to repeat that." Her sister looked uncertain.
She wasn't expecting that response. She looked as though she was about
to say it again, but she couldn't. "I'm---I'm not repeating that," she
said, almost shaken. "Then I won't be repeating this," my client said
firmly. "I'm getting off this roller coaster. If you want to get off
with me, do it now. And I've always loved you." The sister teared up and
asked for some time to speak to her attorney alone. A few minutes later,
the case settled. You've heard the advice that in difficult moments like
these you need to be empathetic and try to reach common ground. I think
that's right and it's noble. But sometimes, it's not practical. What do
you do when you feel like your compassion has been exhausted? How do you
communicate when you believe your empathy is being exploited or taken
advantage of?

#### When Push Comes to Shove

Kindness alone doesn't always work. No amount of patience or gentle
explanation makes a difference. The person is committed to
misunderstanding you. When it happens, you'll be tempted to do one of
two things. You'll walk on eggshells, constantly adjusting your words
and actions to avoid conflict altogether at the expense of your own
authenticity and peace of mind. Or you'll double down, matching their
negative energy tit-for-tat and round for round. I want you to do
neither. There's a third option. It involves using your new assertive
voice to create responses that leave no room for misinterpretation,
responses that have all the boldness of aggression with none of the
disrespect. There comes a point when it's time to stand up for yourself,
when push comes to shove and you need to voice your disapproval. Yes,
you're still going to show integrity. Yes, you're still going to show
respect. But your response should be about showing that you respect
yourself enough to speak up and say what is unacceptable to you. The
first thing to know about standing up for yourself is when to do it,
because not everyone is worth getting out of your chair for. It's a
know-your-worth mentality. Not everyone is worth your peace of mind. You
have to know and consciously decide if the person standing in front of
you is one who means something to you. To assertively disagree and stand
up for yourself is both an art and a skill. Here are the advanced tools
you'll need the next time someone goes too far.

#### How to Deflect Insults, Belittling, and Rudeness

When you hear someone say something rude or insulting, understand that
they're wanting something from you. That something is dopamine, the
"feel-good hormone" that motivates and rewards you. Their search for
dopamine has little to do with you personally. It's often a reflection
of their own insecurities. Belittling others can make the powerless feel
powerful, the ignored feel seen, and the jealous feel like they've
gained something. They get dopamine from the attention of the spotlight
or from their sense of control over your negative reaction. It also
distracts them from their own vulnerabilities by allowing them to focus
on perceived or projected weaknesses in you, in the same way you may
catch yourself judging someone. The other person feels less insecure,
even if momentarily, knowing that they can give you insecurities too.
They'll feel less upset knowing that you're upset. It's a cycle in which
their temporary high comes at the cost of your confidence. The key is to
see these types of comments for what they truly are: an attempt to
elicit a response. Remember, it's not about you. It's about their need
for your response. So when they say something for their hit of dopamine,
the worst thing you can do is give it to them. That's why you're not
going to.

##### When they insult or offend you

- "You're an idiot."
- "You're a loser."
- "You're ugly."

Whether it's name-calling or personal attacks on your character, looks,
ability, or identity, these comments are meant to hurt. They might be
aimed at your age, race, gender, or background. They're meant to cut
deep, and they often hurt more because they're direct. I know that when
you get an insult it feels better to throw it right back. "Oh, I'm an
idiot? Well, you're ..." But that only ratchets up the problem. Maybe you
can convince yourself that you're okay with that, but now you're the one
wanting dopamine. The blows will continue to get thrown until one of you
bows out and receives a momentary "win." It's not worth it. Your value
is too high for such low behavior. When someone insults or offends you,
try these steps:

1.  **Give it a long pause**
    The long pause gives their words a chance to echo back to them. The
    pause also allows their words to fall before they get to you, as I'll
    discuss in chapter eleven, which keeps you from getting defensive. A
    long pause makes them rethink their words and question whether they
    will stand by them or take them back. Remember, the awkward pause
    will make them squirm, and that's okay. And most of all, the silence
    takes away their dopamine.
2.  **Slowly repeat what they said**
    Often, the silence is all you need to say. If it requires more,
    repeat what they said back to them very...slowly. Here, you're the
    echo. You're ensuring that they heard every word of what they said.
3.  **Keep breathing out**
    When you repeat their words back, it will either clear up the
    confusion or add fuel to the fire. Go to your breath. In that
    moment, you need to rely on breath control to make sure you don't
    tighten your body or muddle your thinking. If you enter into a state
    of shallow breathing, there's a higher risk that you'll have a
    delayed display of emotion or anger and lose the high ground. If
    needed, assert a boundary, as you'll learn in the next chapter.

##### When they belittle, patronize, or condescend to you

- "Let me put this in terms that you'll understand."
- "Oh wow, you finally lost some weight. Good for you."
- "It's cute how you thought you did it right."

These comments are meant to diminish your efforts, intelligence, or
status. It's the idea that they're "talking down" to you and explaining
what you already know. Unlike more aggravated insults, these remarks are
often indirect. There is typically a sense of feigned or pretend praise,
or friendliness, that's underscored with a put-down to reduce your
significance. When someone belittles, patronizes, or condescends to
you, try these steps:

1.  **Make them say it again**
    Ask them to repeat it. That's it. When you ask the other person to
    repeat what they just said, you take all the fun---a.k.a.
    dopamine---out of it. It's like throwing a wet, soggy blanket over
    their words. They're also not expecting that reply. When someone
    makes a belittling remark, they expect the spotlight to turn to you.
    But when you ask them to repeat what they just said, the spotlight
    jerks right back to them. They'll become uncomfortable. The result is
    often a quick reply of "Never mind," or "Uh, I meant..." as they try
    to readjust their response. It can be as simple as:
    - "I need you to repeat that."
    - "I need you to say that again."
    - "I didn't get all of that---can you repeat it?"
2.  **Ask a question of outcome**
    Regardless of whether they have the guts to repeat the comment,
    you're going to respond using a question of outcome. This type of
    question seeks to highlight and project the reaction that they tried
    to elicit. Again, you're verbalizing the echo of them they need to
    hear.
    - "Did you want that to hurt?"
    - "Did you want that to embarrass me?"
    - "Was that supposed to make me feel small?"
    - "Did that feel good to say out loud?"
3.  **Reply with silence**
    No matter their answer, let your silence be your reply. It's better
    not to respond. Most likely, they'll have a terrible excuse or say
    they're just joking or start fumbling over their words and
    backtracking. Let their poor behavior linger as your silence shows
    you to be the one with control and composure.

##### When they're rude or dismissive

- "Oh, you're still talking?"
- "No one asked you."
- "I feel dumber just by listening to you."

These comments are the more common, general remarks that go against
social norms and show a lack of respect. They can be direct or indirect,
and they're abrasive. The goal of these comments is to invalidate your
thoughts or beliefs. When someone is rude to you or dismissive of your
views, try these steps:

1.  **Give it a short pause**
    Pause just long enough to consider their words. Here, you're using
    silence as a scale, weighing their words to decide if what they said
    is worth your time and effort.
2.  **Ask a question of intent**
    These questions are similar to outcome-based questions but instead
    are input-focused, seeking to highlight the sound of their words and
    probing into their intentions. Questions like:
    - "Did you mean for that to sound rude?" (or offensive or
      dismissive)
    - "Did you mean for that to come across short?"
    - "What did you intend with that statement?"
    - "How did you expect me to react to that?"
    - "Was that meant to be helpful, or hurtful?"
3.  **Wait**
    The vast majority of the time, the other person will clarify or
    apologize and readjust their comment with something like "Oh
    goodness, no, not at all, what I meant was..." If this happens,
    congratulations, you avoided taking things personally and potentially
    throwing a wrench in a relationship. If, however, their intent was
    ill-willed, leave it. Give them silence and move on.

This formula doesn't just work for verbal conversation. It works for
written communication too. A quick email or text with "Did you mean for
that to sound short?" can cure most poorly worded and shortsighted
messages.

#### Pushing Back Against Bad Apologies

They know they messed up. You know they messed up. And still they avoid
the honest apology. Getting someone to apologize for something they did
to hurt you can be downright miserable and can make it hurt even more,
like salt in the wound. When someone withholds an apology, it can feel
like a denial of your feelings, of your experience. It deepens the rift,
as the lack of a real apology leaves your hurt unacknowledged and the
issue pushed further away from reconciliation. As the healing process is
delayed, trust and respect begin to fall. There is no difference between
refusing to offer an apology and dressing up an excuse to sound like
one. If anything, dressing up an excuse is even worse, because the other
person knows exactly what you need but chooses to withhold it. They know
they should. They know they could. But they won't. It goes back to the
fear of being wrong. Admitting fault or blame can be a blow to the ego.
It makes you confront your own shortcomings. To own up to a mistake and
apologize is difficult for many people. And you've been there too. Times
when you didn't feel like saying you're sorry---"I'm not sorry, I've
done nothing wrong." Understand that if you value the other person in
your life, and that person is truly hurt, withholding an apology is
corrosive. And what does it cost you? Really? What does an apology cost
you, even if you don't fully agree with it? I'm not talking about the
people who play the victim to manipulate you and make you apologize.
There are other strategies for dealing with that. I'm talking about
everyday, you-hurt-my-feelings conversations. It's okay to say, "I'm not
ready to apologize at the moment. I'm too upset and I need to calm down
first." That's communication. That's real. But to withhold an apology
because you don't believe someone deserves it is to play both judge and
jury. No one can tell you how to feel or what to feel. It's like someone
punching you in the arm and telling you it didn't hurt. They don't get
to decide that. And while there's nothing you can do to force someone to
apologize, you can stand up for yourself and let it be known that you
will no longer be accepting bad, useless apologies. Bad apologies come
in all shapes and sizes, but some are more common than others. The
following are the ones you're most likely to hear and have absolutely
heard before:

##### The no-empathy apology

This sounds like: "Well, I'm sorry that you feel that way."
Your response: "Don't apologize for my feelings, apologize for what you
did."
This apology sidesteps all accountability. Rather than addressing their
misconduct, they shift the focus to your reaction. This response
re-centers the conversation to where it belongs: the other person's
actions. You're sending the message of *No, these are my feelings, I got
those. I'll be accountable for those. You be accountable for you.* You're
highlighting the fact that someone being sorry for how you feel isn't an
apology for what they've done. It is not their place to be sorry about
how you feel. It's their place to be sorry about the behavior that
caused those feelings.

##### The no-apology apology

This sounds like: "I'm sorry if I did something wrong," or "I'm sorry
if I upset you."
Your response: "I need you to change the *if* to *that*."
By inserting *if* into the apology, the other person makes the apology
seem conditional and uncertain, as if what they did is still up for
debate. Your response instructs them to remove the conditional language.
By asking the other person to change *if* to *that*, you're guiding them
toward owning their actions more directly. This shifts the apology from
a hypothetical to an acknowledgment of actual harm. "I'm sorry that I
upset you" is more sincere and meaningful.

##### The excuse apology

This sounds like: "I'm sorry, okay? I've just been so stressed lately."
Your response: "You don't need to apologize for your stress. I need you
to apologize for your words."
This apology deflects responsibility for their behavior to their
external environment, like work, or the kids, or stress. But understand
that those are all things that have happened to *them*. They haven't
happened to *you*. And you shouldn't pay the price for them. This
response takes away the power of their excuse. Their stress didn't say
something hurtful. Their work didn't make you upset. Redirect the
responsibility back to whom it belongs.

##### The toxic apology

This sounds like: "I'm sorry that I'm such a horrible person," or "I'm
sorry that you're so perfect."
Your response: "I'm willing to accept an apology."
This apology isn't just toxic. It's manipulative. And they're hoping
that you'll take the bait. Here's what they're hoping it looks like:

> YOUR MOM: "I'm sorry that I'm such a bad mother."
>
> YOU: "You're not a bad mother, you just need to understand that..."
>
> YOUR MOM: "Yes I am, I'm horrible. That's what you think. You always
> try to..."

And off they go, far, far away from the hurt that they caused you. These
kinds of apologies frame the other person as the victim in an attempt to
garner sympathy and make you the comforter. This response keeps you out
of the trap. It's neutral and measured, and it asserts what you're
willing to accept and what you're not willing to entertain. If they try
again, simply repeat it: "I'm willing to accept an apology."

##### The justification apology

This sounds like: "I was just kidding," "I was just joking," or "I was
just messing around."
Your response: "Then be funnier," or "Then find new material," or "I
wasn't."
This kind of apology is a veiled attempt to minimize the impact of their
actions and suggests that what they did shouldn't have been taken
seriously. It undermines the validity of your feelings and implies that
the problem is with you---your lack of a sense of humor, your
sensitivity, your overreaction. This response counters that tactic and
makes clear that humor never justifies harm.

#### The End of Interruptions

Not all interruptions are bad. Maybe the other person is excited. Maybe
they can't help it. Interruptions are common and expected in laid-back
conversations with friends and in casual settings. That's not an issue.
But when you're trying to have a serious conversation, a heart-to-heart,
or a business meeting with company-wide ramifications, interruptions
can be infuriating. Here's how to put a stop to them.

##### Step 1: Let the other person interrupt you

The first time they interrupt, let them. Yes, let them. But just the
first time. Allowing the other person to interrupt you on the first
swing serves two purposes.

1.  Their interruption gives you the high ground as the more mature,
    more reasonable person. The less impulsive, the more thoughtful. If
    you cut them off too soon with "Uh, *excuse me*, I was still
    talking," it can come across as too harsh, often making you look
    unforgiving or insecure. Remember, confident people know how to
    select their timing. The other person hasn't taken anything away from
    you. If anything, their interruption makes them look bad. Don't steal
    their negative light and put it on yourself.
2.  Their interruption lets them get their impulsive thoughts out. It's
    at this stage that what the other person says is primarily
    emotion-driven. It's a knee-jerk reaction. If they have to speak
    their mind so badly that they have to say it right at that moment,
    they weren't going to listen to what you were about to say anyway.
    You can't pour water into a glass that's already full. So let them
    spill it out.

As soon as they're finished with their thought, go back to exactly where
you left off. Don't address their comment. Don't get carried away on a
tangent. Restart your sentence. This signals to the other person that
you weren't done talking without risking your credibility and that
you're committed to communicating in complete messages.

##### Step 2: Use their name

Say their name to stop their interruption. Names catch people's
attention. If you cut the other person off with "Hey!" or "Just listen!"
they'll get more defensive and closed off. But if you say their name,
even if it's forceful or stern, they tend to remain open. Using their
name is also a good way to stop someone who is dominating a conversation
or talking over people. Say their name out loud at a normal level. If it
doesn't stop them, repeat it while increasing your volume.

##### Step 3: Correct the behavior

Here, you're going to assert yourself with statements that are *I*
driven rather than *you* driven (think "You're interrupting me" or
"Don't interrupt me!"). Use one of these responses in a calm, collected
manner:

- "I cannot hear you when you interrupt me."
- "I will listen to you when I'm finished."
- "I want to listen to you. I need to finish my thought before I do."

These responses work because they not only are direct but also position
you in a way that the other person has to expose themself in order to
oppose you. Interrupting again would place their poor behavior too far
out on a ledge as a blatant violation. It would mean they're not
interested in being heard, which means they're not truly interested in
conversation but rather in wanting to hear themself speak. Most people
aren't willing to look that bad. More often than not, after you follow
these steps, they won't interrupt you in the conversation again. By
allowing them to interrupt the first time, calmly using their name, and
holding your ground, you've created a power dynamic in your favor while
still maintaining your credibility. Here's what that could look like
between you and a coworker, Alex:

> YOU: "The main issue with the current project timeline is that---"
>
> ALEX: "Listen, we've always made it work, okay? Timeline or no
> timeline. I mean, if it were up to me, we'd already have this moving
> forward without needing input from management..."

You say nothing and allow Alex to finish, using breath control to
maintain steady composure.

> ALEX: "...And I understand that you and I don't always see eye to eye,
> but I know that what I bring to the table provides value."
>
> YOU: "The main issue with the current project timeline is that it
> doesn't account for the new budget approvals, which may slow down
> the---"
>
> ALEX: "It won't. I've seen this before, okay? There's this---"
>
> YOU: "Alex."

Alex pauses.

> YOU: "I can't hear you when you interrupt me. Let me finish."

Alex nods and acknowledges your turn to speak. This method keeps the
relationship respectful. Imagine instead that at the first interruption,
you angrily say, "I'm talking!" You'll lose the power dynamic, as now
you're the one who appears more emotional and needy. Other sarcastic
phrases like "Did the middle of my sentence interrupt the beginning of
yours?" may seem cool, but they only lose you respect and make you less
desirable to listen to. Using your assertive voice to stop interruptions
maintains respect through measured responses.

#### A Better Way to Disagree

One of the important uses of your assertive language is to voice
disagreement. It's part of standing up for yourself. But what you say
and how you say it when you disagree can be all the difference between
sounding assertive and sounding insecure. It's easy to disagree poorly
(think "Nuh-uh!" or "Not true!"). It's much harder to disagree
effectively. Handling disagreement goes back to a core theme of this
book: winning an argument often loses you more. You can disagree with
another's viewpoint without trying to win or play a trump card. Voicing
disagreement is standing up for yourself. Pushing your disagreement at
the expense of another's voice, however, is standing over someone else.
Here are some advanced techniques that will improve your ability to
voice disagreement without losing ground---or taking it. The next time
you need to disagree, try this.

##### Apply the Is it worth it? filter

Sometimes, it feels as though the other person is looking for an
argument. Like they're trying to suck you into a vortex, where
everything and anything you say is twisted and turned or boomeranged
back to make you agree with them. Maybe it's about politics. Maybe it's
about religion. Maybe it's about how the towels should be folded
(actually, never mind the last one). The point is, don't let them put
you in that position where you feel like your back is against the wall
or like you're hitting your head against one. Before it goes too far,
apply a quick *Is it worth it?* filter. Ask, "Is this something we have
to agree on?" For example:

> YOUR PARTNER: "I'm thinking about changing up the laundry detergent to
> this brand I saw a commercial for on TV. What do you think?"
>
> YOU: "I'd rather not. I like the one we've been using."
>
> YOUR PARTNER: "But the other one is also supposed to be more
> eco-friendly. It's better for the environment."
>
> YOU: "I get that, I'm just not convinced it'll work as well as the one
> we have."
>
> YOUR PARTNER: "Why is it that you never want to go along with something
> unless it's your idea?"
>
> YOU: "Is this something we have to agree on?"
>
> YOUR PARTNER: "No, I guess you're right."

Immediately, this question forces the other person to evaluate the
priority of the conversation. This technique is especially good for what
99 percent of arguments are about---nothing. Use this *Is it worth it?*
filter if you find yourself in disagreement over mundane issues or
arguments about things that may never come to pass. Sure, they may want
you to agree with them. But do you have to? Usually, the answer is no.
If somehow the answer is yes, move to the next filter: Is this something
we have to agree on *now*? For example:

> YOU: "Is this something we have to agree on?"
>
> YOUR PARTNER: "I mean, yeah, I think we should."
>
> YOU: "Is this something we have to agree on right at this moment?"
>
> YOUR PARTNER: "Oh, no, I suppose not. We can try it out first and then
> decide."

This question forces the other person to evaluate the timing of the
conversation. It's common in close relationships to argue about things
that'll never happen. You're arguing on what-ifs and what-abouts. By
asking if an immediate agreement is necessary, you introduce the
possibility of postponing the decision until more information is
available or until both of you are more ready to address it. Asking to
postpone is a quick way to defuse disagreement by grounding the
conversation on what really matters in the moment.

##### Use your vantage point

When you respond with "I disagree," it's direct. And in many contexts,
it's too direct. "I disagree" can expose you to a volley of
back-and-forth arguments, potentially escalating the situation
unnecessarily. That's because while you say, "I disagree," the other
person hears, "You're wrong." And that can light up their psychological
triggers of social evaluation or competence. Now, there are times when
they really are wrong, like if they're trying to convince you that the
sky is green. That's not what I'm talking about. I'm making the point
that "I disagree," while direct (which is good), can create more
problems for you because it can make the other person feel shot down and
defensive (not good). Even if you say, "I respectfully disagree,"
there's nothing respectful about it---and they know that because they
can feel it. Instead, opt for phrases that signal viewpoints, not
verdicts. That is, convey your opinion from a particular vantage point
as opposed to a blunt dismissal. This strategy opens up space for
dialogue rather than confrontation. To use your vantage point
effectively, try one of these three phrases.

1.  **"I see things differently."**
    When you frame your response as a difference in viewpoint, it's like
    telling someone what you see from where you're sitting in a room. It
    widens the perspectives on the subject like a lens zooming out of
    magnification. Notice the difference between "You're wrong" and "From
    where I'm sitting, I see something different." The idea of seeing
    something differently makes your response about sharing perceptions
    instead of disputing facts. This response is useful for situations
    when:
    - They're trying to press a one-size-fits-all solution
    - You need to introduce a nuanced perspective or add context
    - They overlook aspects that you give higher or lower importance
2.  **"I take another approach."**
    This response indicates that while the approach is different, the
    goal is the same. You get the same result, but you just have a
    different method of showing your work. There are direct routes, and
    there are scenic routes. Each has its benefits. Each gets you to
    where you want to be. The benefit of this response is that it focuses
    both of your sights on the ultimate goal. It emphasizes collaboration
    over conflict. You both want the best for whatever it is, such as
    your family, the company, or your country. You just take another
    approach to it. This response is effective in situations when:
    - You disagree about what's "best" for a common objective
    - Their method or plan of action lacks consideration of other
      factors
    - They're fixated on doing things a certain way
3.  **"I tend to lean the opposite."**
    By using history and experience as a backstop, you give yourself an
    anchoring point or foundation to express your view. Instead of
    challenging the other person, such as when you say, "I don't agree
    with you," this response relies upon a history of what you typically
    do, what you prefer to do, or how you tend to think. Arguing from a
    method of preference keeps your position from getting
    confrontational. You're stating what you normally do, and people are
    more willing to accept that than a quick reaction that slams a door
    in their face. This response is helpful in situations when:
    - Their position conflicts with your values
    - You need to express experience over the subject matter
    - You see a different conclusion from the shared evidence

Knowing the right way to disagree positions you as the calmer, more
controlled person in the room. Phrases like the preceding ones help
continue conversations rather than cutting them off. But what if someone
is insistent and pushes back again? Simply repeat the phrase as many
times as you need. The other person will get the point: you're not one
to be pushed over.

When confronted by a difficult person, you don't have to play their
game. Refuse to let bad apologies, repeated interruptions, and bids for
disagreement disrupt your confidence. When you stand firm, speak with an
assertive voice, and deny the other person the dopamine they're seeking,
you'll gain and maintain the high ground.

#### CHAPTER SUMMARY

- Standing your ground and speaking up for yourself is self-care.

- The key to responding to hurtful or offensive comments is to refuse to
  > give in to their search for dopamine. Prevent the immediate reward
  > of a dopamine spike by using strategies that delay your answer, like
  > taking a long pause, slowly repeating their words back to them, or
  > using a question of intent.

- Be firm against bad apologies, interruptions, and bids for
  > disagreement by calling out the behavior and using concise,
  > assertive phrases.

- When you refuse to play down to someone else's poor communication
  > habits, you keep the high ground and maintain credibility.

### Chapter 9: Boundaries

You don't need a relatable story for this one. Saying no is hard. You
didn't have a problem saying no when you were young. But somewhere along
the way as you grew older, you found out that saying no had a cost.
Saying no to peer pressure made you feel left out. Saying no to your
parents or a teacher meant punishment or discipline. Saying no to
certain activities made you feel like something was wrong with you or
that you wouldn't be liked. So you acquiesced, you compromised, you
people-pleased for the sake of everyone else's peace except your own.
You prioritized others' comfort and desires over your own well-being,
often at the expense of what you really wanted. Over time, it turned
into a pattern: overcommit, stress, resent, and repeat. Learning to say
no is not only reclaiming your power to make decisions that honor your
needs but also rediscovering the childlike freedom to choose without
fear. You can relearn that it's okay to prioritize your well-being, to
say what you need to say in a way that honors you and the world around
you. And when you do, you'll find that it'll make you healthier,
happier, and more authentic to who you truly are. Let's start small. I
got you.

Ding!

In the corner of your laptop screen you see a notification for a message
from a coworker. "Hey! Wanna grab coffee tomorrow at that new café? Need
my caffeine fix lol" Ugh. Without hesitation, your gut wants to say no.
It's not that you don't like this person. They're nice enough, really.
But you see them as a work friend, not a friend friend. Really more of a
repeat acquaintance. And you don't necessarily feel like giving up an
hour making small talk when you already have so much going on. You're
faced with three choices:

A. Accept it
B. Decline it
C. Ignore it

You and I both know good and well that you want to choose C. In fact, I
bet you've already ignored the message and minimized the window. Yes,
ignoring it works, but for all the wrong reasons. You have a limited
number of ignores until the other person catches on that you're avoiding
them. When you hit that limit, the other person will fill in their own
blank as to why you're avoiding them, and it's almost guaranteed to be
worse than the truth of why you want to say no. It's also a cop-out.
Sure, you could wait until tomorrow when you see your coworker at the
office, or send a reply, "Oh, sorry! I totally missed this! Darn.
Would've loved to." Come on. How many times can you do that? How does
that show respect to your coworker or to yourself? Here's another reason
why ignoring isn't the move: the decision is still taking up mental
space, living in your head rent-free. Every time you see that unread
message, every time the thought crosses your mind, there's the weight
(no matter how negligible) of an unresolved issue. Ignoring it doesn't
make it go away. It only prolongs the decision and ensures a secondary
conversation down the road. The coworker will ask for another time
you're available, putting you on the spot again. More wasted time, more
wasted stress. When you get an invitation that you don't want to accept,
whether it's for a dinner party with that couple you're not crazy about,
a night out when you want to stay in, or that getaway that doesn't
interest you, you're not negotiating with the other person. You're
negotiating with yourself. Your peace of mind isn't negotiable. Even to
you. Confidence means if you want to accept, you accept. If you don't,
you don't. How would you say no to your coworker's message? I'm assuming
you're thinking of something like this: "Hey! Thanks for the invite, but
I can't. I'm just super busy right now. Sorry!" How good do you feel
about responses like this one? Do they feel genuine? Do they feel
comfortable? Likely not. Here's how you're going to fix it. If you read
chapter seven, you know to go ahead and get rid of the unnecessary
apology and involuntary justification. After that, you're left with
this: "Thanks for the invite, but I can't. I'm just super busy right
now. Sorry!" Broken down, there are two elements. There's gratitude
(thanks for inviting me) followed by the no (but I can't). The problem
with this sequence of beginning with gratitude and ending with no is
that it's too tempting to tag on a justification or an excuse to the end
of the sentence. For example, "Thanks for the invite, but I can't...
because I have this thing I need to go to and I'm too busy and..."
Another problem is that this sequence tees the other person up to ask
you why or inquire further, because when you end with "but I can't,"
they almost feel like you're expecting them to show concern and respond,
"Oh bummer, why not?" or "How come?" And one of the biggest problems
with this order is that it causes you to use the word *but*, as in,
"Thank you, *but*..." The *but* takes away from your previous statement
of gratitude. There's a better way. To start building your confidence
through saying no to simple invitations and social offers, try these
three steps:

Step 1: Say no.

- "I can't."
- "I won't be able to."
- "I need to say no / I need to take a pass."
- "I made a promise to myself that..."

Step 2: Show gratitude.

- "Thank you for inviting me / including me / thinking of me."
- "That's so kind of you / that means a lot."
- "I appreciate you asking me."
- "I'm flattered / honored."

Step 3: Show kindness.

- "Sounds like a wonderful time!"
- "Hope it goes well! / I know it will be great!"
- "I've heard good things about..."
- "Hope you're doing well!"

This sequence works for several reasons. First, you begin with the no
because it's direct, and direct is kind. Second, you layer the no with
gratitude, which acknowledges the value of the gesture and also
reciprocates thoughtfulness. By saying no and then using gratitude, you
remove the need to use *but* in your response. Lastly, ending with a
statement of kindness finishes the response on a more pleasant note, one
that doesn't draw a "Why not?" but instead encourages a "You're welcome!"
or "You'll be missed!" And especially in text or written communication,
feel free to use emojis when appropriate to help give the reader
emotional context. So get out your imaginary laptop again and look at
the invite for coffee with your coworker. Rather than removing the
notification or not responding, you reply: "I can't. Thank you for the
invite. I've heard good things about it!" Rarely will a clean, confident
reply like that ever draw an objection or pushback. Compare that reply
to the more awkward "Thanks for the invite, but I can't make it." A
stern warning: If you're still asked for a justification, an
explanation, or a reason why you said no---do not give in to it. Unless
the other person is someone you love and trust and feel comfortable
being 100 percent open with, don't give in to it. If you feel the need
to reply, simply repeat the turndown. In the coffee scenario, if your
coworker messaged back, "Aw why not?" you'd reply by repeating your
turndown: "I can't." At that point, it's colder for a reason. And that
reason is you don't need to excuse or justify why you're choosing what's
right for you. No is the only reason you need. No is a complete
sentence. Embrace the feelings of disappointment. Work through them. Be
okay with them. Don't let go of your confidence. This is part of the
process of reclaiming your needs and finding your freedom. Understand
that when you feel like you're disappointing the other person, it's
typically 98 percent ego and 2 percent truth. That is, part of your
feelings of disappointment is really you convincing yourself that your
presence is so needed that the other person will be crushed if you say
no. That you're so vital to their good time that the other person isn't
emotionally resilient enough to handle it. Rarely are you or I that
important. Take a big breath and move forward. When it comes to standing
up for yourself, disappointing someone often means you're doing
something right. But what about the harder conversations, like the
comments and questions that make you uncomfortable? The ones that come
from people you know to be toxic or manipulative? The ones that ask too
much of you? How do you say no then?

#### How to Build a Boundary

You've probably heard of a boundary as it relates to self-respect or
self-esteem. And though you may be familiar with the topic, having the
words to effectively create a boundary requires a particular skill. It's
about more than setting limits. It's how to communicate those limits
assertively. Whereas saying no to a social invitation may be simply
closing a door, asserting a boundary is more like building a fortress
with a moat.

##### Defining the perimeter

Typically, you'll hear people refer to personal boundaries as "drawing a
line" or "crossing a line." That's a half-baked description. A boundary
isn't a line. It's a perimeter. Think of a circle or a rectangle:
there's no end and no beginning. The area is fully enclosed, creating a
defined space that is distinct and unique to its owner. When you drive
around a neighborhood or even a country road, it's common to see a
fence. That fence is important. It tells you that the property belongs
to someone, that someone values what's on the other side. The fence is
both a force to keep people out and a warning of how close they can get
until they're trespassing, visually communicating the limits of the
space. Personal boundaries work much the same way. It begins with what's
important to you. Your boundaries inform the outside world of your
values, what you value deep down. Maybe it's your health, your family,
your career, your well-being, your self-respect. These are the things in
your life worth protecting. For example, let's say your family is your
top priority. That's not a boundary, it's a *value*. And you let the
world outside know it's your value when you say no to that networking
event that would've meant you'd miss good-night prayers and tuck-ins. Or
when you pass on that job offer that would've meant more time away from
your partner. Just like that fence, it's a bright-line indication of
where your border sits. Maybe your priority is your mental health. When
you say no to that family reunion that always makes you feel bad about
yourself, or part ways with that friend who is always a "taker" who
drains your emotional energy, other people take notice of the "fence"
you're building. Your actions and choices define the boundary around the
things you value. It's your actions and choices that inform others of
what matters to you. The importance of your family or the value of your
mental health doesn't turn into a boundary until you begin making
intentional choices that put others on notice that they are not allowed
*in*. Part of building your confidence is being the bouncer to your own
self-esteem. You have to let others know what's allowed and what isn't.
The benefits of boundaries are innumerable. They're your cornerstone for
healthy relationships, honest communication, and self-respect. By
building boundaries, you not only protect your emotional and mental
well-being but also educate others to understand and respect your needs
and limits. Boundaries also help you prevent burnout and resentment by
making sure you're not overextended, allowing you to allocate your time
and energy to what truly matters. They enable you to make choices
aligned with your values and priorities, promoting your freedom and
autonomy. Boundaries are also a form of self-care: you're showing up for
yourself enough to protect your peace. As you become more comfortable
creating these boundaries, you'll notice a deeper sense of control over
your life and an enhanced ability to navigate interactions with
assertiveness, building your confidence.

##### Knowing your manual

I want you to go back in your mind and recall a time someone spoke to
you in a way that made you feel small. A fight with an ex. An argument
with a superior. A time when you felt pushed around or less yourself,
without any boundary to help you. Remember specifically how you felt. If
I had to guess, you didn't feel an overwhelming sense of control. You
felt cornered, powerless, constantly in a state of reacting to the
threat in front of you. As if your sense of autonomy were taken away,
much like someone holding the remote control to your emotions, pushing
your buttons, flipping through channels without your consent and leaving
you to watch your pain play out. Instead of handing over the remote
control to your emotions, allowing others to push your buttons and hold
all the control, get into the mindset of giving out manuals. A list of
automatic nos. These manuals give voice to your boundaries, instructing
the other person in detail about how you operate. Think of it like
explaining the rules of a new card game. You're providing the rules and
instructions by which things will move forward. Here's what the
difference sounds like:

- When they have the remote control, you shout: "Stop yelling at me!"
- When you give a manual, you say: "I don't respond to that volume."

- When they have the remote control, you yell: "You can't speak to me
  that way!"
- When you give a manual, you say: "I don't accept the way you're
  speaking to me."

One says, *I have no control*. The other states, *I am in control*. The
manual isn't just for them, either. It's for you too. And that raises a
good question: Do you know what your manual says? There's a possibility
you may not. If you don't, how will anyone else? The solution is to make
a numbered list, a set of instructions, of how---in your very next
conversation ---you will engage in communication. Write them down in
full sentences, laying out your operator's manual. You need to know for
yourself what you will say no to and what you won't allow past your
boundary. For example:

- "I don't respond to disrespect."
- "I will not allow others to tell me or decide how I feel."
- "I don't engage in conversation when I'm not ready."
- "I don't dismiss my intuition as irrelevant."
- "I won't compromise my peace for the sake of appeasement."
- "I don't participate in gossip or character assassination."

You'll find that the act of writing them down gives you a sense of
assuredness. By following your manual, you'll feel more confident in
standing your ground the next time someone insults you, stonewalls you,
or puts words in your mouth. The next time someone says, "You don't even
care about my opinion, you only care about yourself," you'll feel
empowered enough to calmly respond, "I get to decide that." You're
replacing the other person's ability to influence your emotions with a
process that works for your good.

##### Enforcing the boundary

Once you know the value you need to protect and you know your manual,
it's time to enforce the boundary. That means speaking up and telling
the other person what they've run into, and most important, telling them
that they won't be going any further. Here's how to assert your
boundary.

1.  **Begin with the boundary**
    Begin with an "I" statement like you learned in chapter eight, then
    insert your boundary. Using *I* makes it clear that this is your
    boundary, your choice. If you've done your homework, this part should
    be the easiest. Depending on your value, it could sound like:
    - I don't accept how you're treating me.
    - I don't work on weekends.
    - I don't drink alcohol.

    Keep in mind, boundaries don't always have to be *I don't*. They can
    also redirect conversations, reset focus, and clarify your interest
    in constructive communication. Here's a good rule of thumb:
    - Tell them why you're there. When they bring up an unrelated
      issue or try to distract, re-center the conversation. This is a
      boundary of presence.
      > "I'm here because you matter to me."
    - Tell them what you're there to talk about. If they raise past
      issues or attack your character, correct the focus. This is a
      boundary of purpose.
      > "I'm here to talk about what you said to me last Friday."
    - Tell them where you're not going. When they say something
      outlandish or attempt to get an emotional reaction, be firm. This
      is a boundary of integrity.
      > "I'm not going there with you."

    Once you assert your boundary, it's a full stop. Don't be tempted to
    justify or explain. You've now set it on their side of the court to
    decide if they're going to respect your boundary or not.
2.  **Add the consequence**
    If the other person has made it clear that they do not intend to
    respect your boundary, add a consequence. This is what will happen if
    they continue to cross your boundary. There are two steps to it. The
    first is conditional: "If you continue to..." The second is the
    action step: "I'm going to..." As you'll recall from chapter seven,
    this phrase creates confidence, but this time it supports enforcing
    your boundary. Here's what the boundary looks like after adding on a
    consequence:
    - "I don't accept how you're treating me. If you continue to treat
      me this way, I'm going to end the conversation."
    - "I don't work on weekends. If you continue to schedule me on
      weekends, I'm going to find a place that supports my commitment
      to family."
    - "I don't drink alcohol. If you continue to pressure me about it,
      I'm going to leave."
3.  **Follow through**
    This part is the most difficult. If you're going to give a
    consequence, you have to mean it. Asserting yourself is telling the
    other person what you're going to do, then doing it. That means if
    they continue to ignore your boundary, you'll walk away from the
    conversation. You'll start looking for another job. You'll leave the
    party and lean on friends who respect your choices. You are showing
    that you say what you mean and mean what you say. You can't take one
    single step back. Whatever emotional response comes out of their
    mouth, you can't let that bait you into a conversation that erases
    the boundary you just set.

#### How Setting Boundaries Changes Your Relationships

Once you begin creating and enforcing boundaries, there's something you
need to know. Not everyone will like it. Some will even hate it. But
they'll still respect you for it. Boundaries have a way of sifting out
those who are with you not because of who you are but rather because of
what they need you to be. Even close friends. Even family members. There
will be people who prefer the version of you without boundaries. This is
a time for watching and observing who is in your corner, who your real
people are. The ones who love you will support you. The ones who love
you for only what you give to them will be against you. People who
criticize your boundaries are simply reacting to a loss of privilege.
It's almost as if whereas they were previously able to cut in line, now
they have to wait like everyone else. Their discomfort over your
boundary is not a sign that it's wrong, it's a sign that it's working.
Embrace the thought of "No, I don't have to make this make sense to you.
My boundaries were not put up to make you feel comfortable. They were
put up for me." Some people won't understand right away, and that's
okay. Give them the grace to settle with the change. It will be a time
when relationships are tested and recalibrated. A quick note: You don't
want to be the person who has too many boundaries, either. The type who
has so many that it abuses your responsibilities, like not agreeing to
basic collaboration or reasonable requests. A boundary isn't a catchall
excuse. It doesn't justify bad behavior. It doesn't relieve you of your
obligations. Too many boundaries can be counterproductive. Stick to
setting a perimeter around the things you truly value in your life.
Boundaries are the bouncer for your well-being. They reinforce what
you'll allow in and prevent what you don't need from entering your life.
So make sure your bouncer is bold and visible. Think about that one
person coming to mind who you know you need to have that talk with. What
boundaries do you need to put up? What consequences do you need to set?
And how will you promise yourself that you'll follow through? When
you've spent time with these questions, you'll spend more time with the
relationships that fill your cup instead of pouring it out.

#### CHAPTER SUMMARY

- No is a complete sentence. You get over the fear of saying no by
  > learning to embrace the consequences.

- Become comfortable with disappointing people and trust that they are
  > more emotionally resilient than you've made them in your mind.

- Your actions and choices define the boundary around the things you
  > value. If you want to know what someone values, look for where the
  > boundary sits.

- Give others an operator's manual for how to communicate with you---
  > not a remote control. Inform them what you will and will not allow
  > past your boundary.

- If your boundary creates discomfort for another person, it's not a
  > sign that the boundary is wrong. It's a sign that it's working.

## Rule 3: Say It to Connect

### Chapter 10: Frames

I remember the first time my momma took me back-to-school shopping for
new tennis shoes. We walked into Parkdale Mall, past the food court, and
rounded the corner, where I could see a large storefront that said Foot
Locker in red neon lights. I was so excited. I had planned out in my
mind the exact type of shoe I'd get. It needed to make me jump high, so
of course it needed to give me lots of air. It also needed to make me
run fast, so it couldn't be too bulky. And it had to look *cool*. As we
walked into the store, my mouth dropped. There were tons of shoes. They
all looked like they could make me jump high and run fast. They all
looked cool. My poor momma. I about drove her and the patient store
associate crazy trying on every different pair of shoes. Each time she'd
mash her thumb down on my big toe to check the fit. (Does every mom do
that?) Each time she'd make me walk to the end of the store and come
back. There were so many choices. It was overwhelming. I took forever.
Well, eventually, she'd had enough of it. She walked over to the wall,
grabbed two different pairs, turned back around to me, and said, "Choose
one." "Wha-what? What about all the other ones?" I asked. "Nope," she
said, shaking her head and giving me the look. "Choose." I chose my
first pair of Nike Shox, which happened to be the very first pair I
tried on. What my wise momma knew: fewer choices can lead to better
outcomes. Conversations are the same. If a conversation has no goal,
it'll feel as though you're talking about nothing. If a conversation has
too many goals, it'll still feel as though you're talking about nothing.
And no, I'm not referring to casual conversations, the catch-up talks
with your friends and coworkers, or the nightly review of your day with
your partner. I'm talking about conversations that need to achieve a
specific goal: to connect. When you limit the pathways the conversation
can take, you're helping yourself and the other person by making it
easier to connect and find each other in the conversation. I can't
promise that this strategy will make you run faster or jump higher. But
I can promise it works.

#### What Is a Conversational Frame?

To create a clear connection with someone, you need to set a frame
around your conversations. As a picture frame sets borders and enhances
artwork, a frame around a conversation limits off-topics and amplifies
the attention to the subject of conversation. Framing ensures that the
other person has fewer choices in the conversation. It narrows the focus
of the discussion. With a frame, there's no wondering why you're
talking, what you're talking about, or how it's supposed to end. You
tell them your needs as well as your expectations, creating a "same
page" mindset. Like playing off the same sheet music. You both know the
song, the notes, and the time signature. You'll also make it clear that
off-topic or irrelevant issues are out of frame. There's less temptation
to veer off course because your frame establishes the playbook. Without a
perimeter, the argument wanders around and can't settle on a topic---like
looking for the perfect pair of new shoes on a wall. The argument's
subject moves from place to place, retraces its steps, or goes far, far
away from where the conversation started. That's why you can begin an
argument talking about one thing and end it talking about something
completely different. If your subject gets loose, your frame is the herd
dog. When a discussion happens without a frame, any number of unhelpful
results can happen:

- The conversation lasts longer because the subject is unlimited.

- The longer you talk, the more susceptible your words are to
  > misinterpretation, confusion, and misunderstanding.

- You leave the conversation feeling like nothing moved forward, or
  > worse, like it moved two steps backward.

Conversations without a direction are sure to get lost. Vague
conversation openings like "Hey, can we talk? So anyway, remember a few
months ago when..." or "I need to tell you something. It's probably
nothing, but..." aren't helpful---and can even do more damage---because
they open the dialogue aimlessly. Too often, you wait until you're
talking to figure out what you want to say. You're good with
takeoff---that is, initiating discussion---but you don't know how to
land the plane. So you struggle and talk in circles until you finally
discover what you want to say. You wait until the very end of a
ten-minute monologue to deliver your "I say all of that to say..." But
by then it's often too late, and you lose the chance to connect. The
more topics, elements, or themes you pile onto a conversation, the more
you weigh it down, and the less chance you have of it going anywhere.
Without a clear frame or endpoint from the start, the conversation can
quickly tire out the other person. The longer it takes to make your
point, the more you waste the other person's diminishing attention.
You'll lose them. If you've ever heard someone respond with any of these
questions, chances are you didn't put a frame around the conversation:

- "So, you don't want to go to the party?" (when you do)

- "What's your point?" (when you thought you already made it)

- "What are you wanting me to do?" (when you don't want them to do
  anything)

Often, these types of questions prompt you to yell out, "You're missing
the point!" or "You're not listening to me!" But the questions to ask
yourself are: Have I made my point easy to find? Have I put a frame
around it to make it clear and concise? Or have